--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, H ealth, Safety, and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE.  The Department of Energy (DOE) is modernizing its security framework. 
This update addresses rapidly evolving threats, changing mission needs, and advancing 
technology.  The transition to a risk-based security operations (RBSO) approach aligns 
security resources—funding a nd personnel—with mission risk.  This modernized strategy 
enhances protection effectiveness while enabling more flexible, mission supportive 
operations.  The focus is on a risk-based approach to security for high-consequence 
categories of special nuclear material (SNM) and other accountable nuclear material 
operations.  The objective is to replace prescriptive, one-size-fits-all methods with 
adaptable, risk-informed strategies that address evolving threats, control costs, and 
improve mission effectiveness.  An RBSO program increases efficiency and removes 
unnecessary burdens, delays, and expenses that impede DOE/National Nuclear Security 
Administration’s (NNSA’s) national security missions, delivering the right security in the 
right place at the right time. The RBSO approach empowers the Head of Field Element or 
the Officially Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA), as appropriate, to make 
informed risk decisions based on security analysis and effects-based performance 
outcomes. The approach emphasizes continuous improvement, data-driven evaluation, 
and the achievement of defined security objectives, ensuring that operations are flexible, 
focused on managing risks and meeting clear performance standards. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  This Order cancels/supersedes DOE Order (O) 470.1A, 
470.4C, 471.1B, 471.6, 471.7, 473.1A, 473.2A, and 474.2A for the facilities and 
activities specified in section 3.  Cancelling a directive does not alter existing contractual 
or regulatory compliance obligations; Contractor Requirements Documents (CRD) in 
contracts remain effective until formally changed. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Elements.  This Order applies to all Departmental elements, 
including NNSA, and their associated field elements.1 
(1) The NNSA Administrator will ensure that NNSA employees and 
contractors comply with their respective responsibilities under 
this Directive. 
 
1  Operations offices, service center s, site offices, area offices, field offices, government-owned government-
operated facilities, and regional offices of federally staffed laboratories that report directly to a DOE 
Headquarters office. 
DOE O 470.7

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 470.7 
 08-05-2026 
(2) Nothing in this Order shall be construed to limit or supersede the authority 
of the Administrator for Nuclear Security under 50 United States Code 
(U.S.C.) § 2402, Administrator for Nuclear Security, including the 
authority to establish Administration-specific policies unless disapproved 
by the Secretary.  In the event of any inconsistency between this Order 
and the NNSA Act, the Act controls with respect to NNSA programs 
and activities. 
b. DOE Contractors.  The requirements of this Order shall be incorporated into 
applicable contracts, including Management and Operating contracts.  The 
contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD, if 
applicable. Contractors shall comply with the requirements of applicable federal, 
state, and local laws and regulations in carrying out the requirements of this Order 
unless relief has been granted in writing.  Omission of any applicable law or 
regulation from the Order does not affect the obligation of the contractor to 
comply with such law or regulation.  Contractors must comply with the 
requirements of this Order, except to the extent modified by the equivalencies or 
exemptions identified herein or issued to the contractor in writing by DOE 
utilizing the process outlined in DOE O 251.1E, Departmental Directives 
Program, including as amended or updated.  
c. Equivalencies and Exemptions. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at 50 U.S.C. §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, 
and 2511, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, and to ensure consistency 
through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the 
Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and 
oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for 
activities under the Director’s cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  This Order does not apply to activities regulated by the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) or by a State acting under an 
agreement with the NRC pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 
(AEA), as amended. 
(3) Other Equivalencies/Exemptions.  Many DOE safeguards and security 
(S&S) Program requirements are based on regulations from federal 
agencies and codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFRs), 
Executive Orders (EOs), or Presidential Directives.  To deviate from 
these, follow the process specified in the source document.  If none exists, 
deviations require risk analysis, ODFSA approval with Program Office 
review, and consultation with the DOE Office of the General Counsel to 
confirm legal eligibility.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 470.7 3 
08-05-2026 
4. REQUIREMENTS.  Additional S&S requirements are outlined in Attachments 1 and 2, 
as applicable. 
a. Delegation of S&S Authorities. 
(1) All delegations must be formally documented and issued in accordance 
with the office granting authority. 
(2) Each delegator remains responsible for the delegate’s acts or omissions in 
carrying out the purpose of the delegation. 
(3) The acceptance of security risks is a fundamental federal responsibility 
and may not be delegated. 
b. Site Security Plan. 
(1) Each DOE facility subject to this Order must have a security plan that 
addresses site-specific security requirements and procedures, consistent 
with the applicable laws, regulations, Executive Orders, other 
national-level requirements, and DOE Directives.  The security plan must 
also address the key contractor performance requirements provided 
in Attachment 2. 
(2) Contractor performance requirements will be defined in 
contractual language. 
(3) The Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA) must submit a 
security plan to the ODFSA for review and approval. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Secretary of Energy. 
(1) Ensure an effective S&S Program is established and executed for the 
protection of SNM, sites, and other Departmental assets under the 
authorities granted by relevant Executive Orders; the Department of 
Energy Organization Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 7101, Definitions, to 
§ 7352, Contents of review); and the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq.); and in accordance with P.L. 106-65, 
National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2000. 
(2) Designate senior Departmental officials to direct and administer the 
S&S Program. 
(3) Delegate, in writing, all responsibilities and authorities as necessary for the 
administration of the S&S Program.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 470.7 
 08-05-2026 
(4) Designate DOE program elements responsible for ensuring foreign 
nationals’ visits requiring access to classified information are conducted in 
accordance with governing international agreements or treaties. 
b. The Deputy Secretary. 
(1) Approve and implement S&S policies. 
c. Program Secretarial Officer. 
(1) Provide performance requirements, guidance, and oversight to ensure S&S 
planning programs under a Program Secretarial Officer’s cognizance are 
adequately implemented, managed, and maintained. 
(2) Designate DOE Cognizant Security Office (CSOs) under their purview. 
(3) Delegate authority to the ODFSA. 
(4) NNSA, through the Associate Administrator and Chief for Defense 
Nuclear Security acts as the Senior NNSA official responsible for the 
direction and administration of the NNSA implementation. 
(a) Responsible for the management and implementation of S&S 
programs administered by NNSA and its subordinate offices, 
including provision of the appropriate level of authorities and 
resources to effectively manage and execute S&S responsibilities. 
(b) Responsible for the development and implementation of security 
programs for the Administration, including the protection, control 
and accounting of materials, and for physical security for all sites 
of the NNSA. 
d. Cognizant Security Offices.  CSOs are designated by the Program Secretarial 
Officer or, for NNSA, the Office of the Administrator through the Associate 
Administrator and Chief for Defense Nuclear Security. 
(1) Administer and oversee assigned S&S program management operations 
activities for their sites on behalf of the Program Secretarial Office. 
(2) Industrial Security Service Providers render facility clearances (FCL), 
foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) determinations, and other 
industrial security-related services on behalf of the CSO. 
e. Heads of Field Elements. 
(1) Provide guidance and oversight to ensure S&S Planning Programs under 
their cognizance are adequately implemented, managed, and maintained.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 470.7 5 
08-05-2026 
(2) Administer program planning requirements for the purpose of protecting 
S&S interests. 
(3) Ensure Contracting Officers incorporate the CRD into 
applicable contracts. 
(4) Approve equivalencies to this Directive in consultation with the 
responsible Program Office. 
f. Director, Office of Environmental, Health, Safety and Security. 
(1) Act as the senior agency official responsible for the direction and 
administration of the DOE implementation of and compliance with the 
National Industrial Security Program pursuant to Executive Order 12829, 
National Industrial Security Program. 
(2) Act as the senior agency official responsible for the direction and 
administration of the DOE information security program pursuant to 
Executive Order 13526, Classified National Security Information. 
(3) Review site security plans for consistency with applicable requirements. 
g. Officially Designated Federal Security Authority.  ODFSAs are federal 
employees who possess the knowledge and responsibilities for each situation in 
which they are assigned through delegation. 
(1) Execute requirements and responsibilities that are formally delegated from 
DOE or NNSA. 
(2) Fulfill responsibilities as defined in this Order. 
(3) Approve site security plans and supporting analyses that protect assets under 
their cognizance. 
(4) Accept or transmit the security risk for assets under their cognizance. 
(5) Review and approve equivalencies for assets under their cognizance. 
h. Officially Designated Security Authority.  ODSAs are federal or contractor 
employees who possess the appropriate knowledge and responsibilities for each 
situation to which they are assigned through delegation. 
(1) Execute those responsibilities formally delegated. 
(2) Ensure security protocols are followed, exemptions and equivalencies are 
documented and approved. 
(3) The ODSA must approve all subordinate documents incorporated within 
the security plan to ensure compliance with established security protocols 
and standards.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 470.7 
 08-05-2026 
i. Cognizant Office of the General Counsel or Chief Counsel. 
(1) Review site security plans for consistency with applicable laws, Executive 
Orders, regulations, and government-wide policies. 
j. Contracting Officers. 
(1) For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a site/facility 
management contract is affected by this Order, the contracting officer(s) 
shall incorporate the requirements into the affected contract(s) via the 
“Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or 
through negotiation and modification, as appropriate. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS.  This Order does not invoke any DOE technical standards or 
industry standards as required methods unless specifically included in the references. 
7. REFERENCES. 
a. P.L. 90-618,Gun Control Act of 1968 
b. P.L. 95-452, 92, Statute 1101, Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended 
c. P.L. 111-272, Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act 
d. P.L. 103-353, Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act 
of 1994 
e. P.L. 114-328, National Defense Authorization Act, 2017 
f. 10 U.S.C § 4874(a-b), “Award of certain contracts to entities controlled by a 
foreign government: prohibition” 
g. 18 U.S.C. § 930, Possession of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons in Federal 
Facilities 
h. 21 U.S.C. § 841, Prohibited Acts A 
i. 42 U.S.C. § 5195c, Critical Infrastructures Protection 
j. 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011–2296, The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended 
k. 42 U.S.C. § 2278a, “Trespass upon Commission installations” 
l. 42 U.S.C. §§ 7101–7352, Department of Energy Organization Act, as amended 
m. 50 U.S.C. §41, National Nuclear Security Administration 
n. 50 U.S.C. § 2402, Administrator for Nuclear Security

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 470.7 7 
08-05-2026 
o. 50 U.S.C. §2661, Protection of Certain Nuclear Facilities and Assets from 
Unmanned Aircraft 
p. 7 CFR § 331, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and 
Toxins, Security 
q. 9 CFR § 121, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and 
Toxins, Security 
r. 10 CFR § 110, Export and Import of Nuclear Equipment and Material 
s. 10 CFR § 707, Workplace Substance Abuse Programs at DOE Sites 
t. 10 CFR § 710, Procedures for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Matter and Special Nuclear Material or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
u. 10 CFR § 712, Human Reliability Program 
v. 10 CFR § 824, Procedural Rules for the Assessment of Civil Penalties for 
Classified Information Security Violations 
w. 10 CFR § 851, Worker Safety and Health Program 
x. 10 CFR § 860, Trespassing on Department of Energy Property 
y. 10 CFR § 1016, Safeguarding of Restricted Data by Access Permittees 
z. 10 CFR § 1017, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled 
Nuclear Information 
aa. 10 CFR § 1045, Nuclear Classification and Declassification 
bb. 10 CFR § 1046, Medical, Physical Readiness, Training, and Access Authorization 
Standards for Protective Force Personnel 
cc. 10 CFR § 1047, Limited Arrest Authority and Use of Force by Protective 
Force Officers 
dd. 10 CFR § 1048, Trespassing on Strategic Petroleum Reserve Facilities 
and Property 
ee. 10 CFR § 1049, Limited Arrest Authority and Use of Force by Protective Force 
Officers of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve 
ff. 29 CFR § 1910, Occupational Safety and Health Standards 
gg. 32 CFR § 117, National Industrial Security Program Operating 
Manual (NISPOM) 
hh. 32 CFR § 2001, Classified National Security Information

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 470.7 
 08-05-2026 
ii. 32 CFR § 2002, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) 
jj. 41 CFR § 102-74, Subpart C, “Conduct on Federal Property” 
kk. 42 CFR § 73, Select Agents and Toxins, Security 
ll. 42 CFR § 1003, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins 
mm. 48 CFR § 904.70, “Facility Clearance” 
nn. 48 CFR § 952, Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses 
oo. 49 CFR § 173, Shippers–General Requirements for Shipments and Packaging 
pp. EO 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry” 
qq. EO 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program” 
rr. EO 12829, “National Industrial Security Program” 
ss. EO 12968, “Access to Classified Information,” as amended 
tt. EO 13467, “Reforming Processes Related to Suitability for Government 
Employment, Fitness for Contractor Employees, and Eligibility for Access to 
Classified National Security Information,” as amended 
uu. EO 13526, “Classified National Security Information” 
vv. Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-12, “Directive on Policy for a 
Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors” 
ww. Presidential Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, 
subject: Tracing of Firearms in Connection with Criminal Investigations, dated 
January 16, 2013 
xx. National Archives and Records Administration General Records Schedule 
(GRS) 5.6, “Security Records” 
yy. National Security Memorandum (NSM)-22, “Critical Infrastructure Security and 
Resilience,” 2024 
zz. DOE O 142.3C, Unclassified Foreign National Access Program, current version 
aaa. DOE O 206.2, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, current version 
bbb. DOE O 226.1B, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy 
ccc. DOE 452.8, Control of Nuclear Weapon Data 
ddd. DOE O 470.6, Technical Security Program, current version

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 470.7 9 
08-05-2026 
eee. DOE O 472.2A, Personnel Security, current version 
fff. DOE O 475.2B, Identifying Classified Information, current version 
NOTE: Whenever a legal, regulatory, or other external standard, or a DOE 
Policy, Order, Notice or Manual is referenced, and such standard 
is amended or superseded, the successor standard is applicable 
under this Order. DOE Orders referenced in this Order can be 
located on the DOE Directives webpage, 
https://www.directives.doe.gov/. 
8. DEFINITIONS.  Terms used in the DOE Safeguards and Security programs are defined 
and located on the Policy Information Resource website, http://pir.doe.gov. 
9. CONTACT.  Address inquiries to the Cognizant Program Office. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 10 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 1 Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 1-I-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER I 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT SAFEGUARDS AND 
SECURITY PROGRAM 
This Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), which includes the requirement in Attachment 2, 
specifies key, measurable performance requirements for Safeguards and Security by Department of 
Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear Security Administration contractors. Contractors with the CRD 
incorporated into their contracts must demonstrate compliance by meeting defined performance 
outcomes. Contractor performance requirements will be defined in contractual language. 
Contractors are expected to regularly assess and report their performance against these requirements, 
ensuring all safeguards and security obligations are met consistently and measurably throughout the 
contract period. 
A violation of the provisions of this CRD relating to the safeguarding or security of restricted data, 
special nuclear material, or other classified information or matter, may result in a civil penalty pursuant 
to section 234B of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 United States Code § 2282b). The 
procedures for the assessment of civil penalties are in Title 10 Code of Federal Regulations § 824, 
Procedural Rules for the Assessment of Civil Penalties for Classified Information Security Violations.  
Any site security plan approved by an Officially Designated Federal Security Authority has the force 
and effect of a DOE Order or Manual; therefore, it is enforceable under 10 CFR § 824.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 2, CHAPTER I 
SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM 
This Attachment provides requirements associated with Department of Energy (DOE) Order (O) 470.7 
and requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated Contractor Requirements Document 
(CRD; Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.7) is inserted. 
1. SECURITY PLANNING.  The contractor is required to establish and maintain a Safeguards and 
Security (S&S) program that prioritizes implementing risk-based planning activities, as approved 
by the Officially Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA).  This approach includes 
developing ODFSA-approved site-specific security plans and analyses that address identified 
risks to DOE assets, personnel, and operations, and regularly assess and report performance. 
a. The purpose of this section is to establish the DOE’s physical protection strategies for 
safeguarding Departmental assets. 
b. For the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) and its subordinate offices, the 
design-basis threat (DBT), as defined in DOE O 470.3, serves as the baseline planning 
document.  The DBT provides a starting point for analyzing potential threats against 
DOE assets. 
c. All other Departmental elements must tailor their physical protection strategies to site-
specific conditions.  Using threat results approved by the ODFSA, these organizations 
must develop: 
(1) Adversary characteristics, including numbers, capabilities, equipment, and tactics. 
(2) Analytical methods for risk assessment and reporting. 
(3) Risk acceptance thresholds consistent with mission and protection needs. 
(4) Risk reporting expectations and processes. 
(5) Defined risk acceptance authorities. 
d. Security Asset Categorization.  DOE possesses assets that must be protected by S&S 
systems against site-specific threats based on the consequences of loss or sabotage with 
effects outside the distance established by the ODFSA.  These assets include: 
(1) Special nuclear material (SNM). 
(2) Chemical and radiological material, nuclear material, and select agents and toxins. 
(3) Classified matter. 
e. Security Risk Acceptance.  Contractors must use a vulnerability assessment or security 
risk assessment, as applicable, to analyze and communicate system effectiveness or 
overall security risk to DOE.

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-2 08-05-2026 
 
f. Graded Protection Concept.  DOE must provide each site with the items listed in 
section c (1–5) based on site-specific threat results.  The graded protection approach 
categorizes DOE assets. 
g. Roll-Up of SNM.  Roll-up must be considered when a defined threat has the capability to 
accumulate lower categories of SNM into greater quantities, thereby raising the total 
quantity to a higher SNM category.  Accumulation occurs when the defined roll-up threat 
could move material to a single location and complete adversarial tasks.  Site-specific 
threat results, material characterization, and associated analysis provide the basis for 
determining the credibility of roll-up.  The ODFSA will approve the SNM configuration 
that requires a roll-up analysis and the scenarios, level of rigor, and documentation 
required for that analysis, and initiates consultation with the Material Risk Review 
Committee, if deemed necessary by the ODFSA, before making a decision. 
2. INSIDER THREAT.  Requirements applicable to the Insider Threat Program are contained in 
DOE O 470.5A, Insider Threat Program, current version. 
3. PERFORMANCE ASSURANCE.  Contractor will implement a performance assurance program 
as outlined in contractual language. 
4. SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY TRAINING PROGRAM.  Contractor will establish an 
Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA) approved training program that aligns with the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities based on appropriate job task analysis. 
5. SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY AWARENESS.  Contractor will implement an S&S 
awareness program that provides briefings and supplemental awareness activities to all 
individuals to communicate personal security responsibilities.  The program will: 
a. Ensure initial, periodic, and termination briefings are conducted as required for cleared 
individuals covering relevant security topics. 
b. Ensure that all individuals granted security clearances execute an SF 312, Classified 
Information Nondisclosure Agreement, prior to accessing classified information. 
6. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT.  The contractor will implement programs covering facility 
clearance (FCL), foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) reviews, Departmental and 
foreign classified visits, and reporting of incidents of security concern (IOSCs). 
7. RECORDS.  Security-related records must be retained in accordance with the National Archives 
and Records Administration General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6, Security Records, and DOE 
Administrative Records Schedule 18, Security, Emergency Planning, and Safety Records.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-3 
 
8. FACILITY CLEARANCES AND REGISTRATION AND FOREIGN OWNERSHIP, 
CONTROL, OR INFLUENCE DETERMINATIONS.  DOE contractors require an active FCL 
and favorable FOCI determination, and designation of a facility security officer when the 
contract or subcontract to be awarded is expected to require the officer to access, receive, 
generate, reproduce, store, transmit, or destroy classified information or matter; SNM; other 
hazardous material presenting a potential radiological, chemical, or biological sabotage threat; 
and/or DOE property of significant monetary value, exclusive of facilities and land values.  
Contractor procedures applicable to the FOCI program must be documented in an ODFSA 
approved site security plan. 
a. If an FCL or FOCI determination is required, Contractors will submit information to 
DOE in accordance with 32 CFR § 117, National Industrial Security Program Operating 
Manual, 48 CFR § 904.70, Facility Clearance, 48 CFR § 952, Solicitation Provisions and 
Contract Clauses, and 10 U.S.C. § 4874(a–b), Award of certain contracts to entities 
controlled by a foreign government: prohibition. 
b. DOE granted FCLs based on a valid Department of Defense (DoD) FCL, Key 
management personnel (KMP) who do not need access to classified information are not 
required to obtain DOE access authorizations under 10 CFR § 710.  Existing security 
clearances from another cognizant security agency fulfill KMP eligibility, with no 
duplicative DOE processing needed unless access to DOE-classified information is 
required. 
9. CONTROL OF CLASSIFIED VISITS.  The contractor will establish and maintain a classified 
visit program, if required, in accordance with t in 32 CFR § 117.16, Visits and Meetings.  
Procedures applicable to classified visits must be documented in ODFSA approved site 
security plans. 
10. INCIDENTS OF SECURITY CONCERN. 
a. Requirements.  An IOSC is an action or inaction contrary to S&S requirements because it 
poses a threat to national security or DOE security assets, including property, personnel, 
information, capabilities, or systems.  IOSCs are categorized by significance type: 
infraction or violation.  A violation is an event in which loss or compromise occurred or 
is suspected.  An infraction is a procedural noncompliance that did not result in loss or 
compromise but could do so if left uncorrected.  The ODSA must establish and 
administer an IOSC program using a graded approach based on event significance.  The 
ODSA also develops and approves the criteria and methodology for local 
implementation.  This program, criteria, and methodology must be documented in the 
ODFSA approved site security plan.  The ODFSA must be notified of all violations and 
infractions involving unclassified controlled nuclear information and unclassified naval 
nuclear propulsion information.

--- page 14 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-4 08-05-2026 
 
b. Reporting.  Initial and final reporting is imperative because the ODFSA has specific 
responsibilities for notifying and coordinating with other agencies, governments, 
Departmental leadership, and Congress for selected IOSCs.  Reports of loss, compromise, 
or suspected compromise of classified information, whether foreign or domestic, must 
be reported to the cognizant security agency through the ODFSA in accordance 
with 32 CFR § 117.8. 
11. NUCLEAR WEAPONS DATA/CRITICAL NUCLEAR WEAPON DESIGN INFORMATION 
(CNWDI)/SIGMAS.  The contractor will authorize and control the receipt, handling, and storage 
of nuclear weapons data, CNWDI, and Sigmas in accordance with DOE O 452.8. 
12. UNCLASSIFIED FOREIGN NATIONAL ACCESS PROGRAM.  Requirements applicable to 
unclassified foreign national access are contained in DOE O 142.3C. 
13. PROTECTIVE FORCE OPERATIONS.  The contractor will establish and maintain standardized 
requirements for managing, administering training programs, maintaining qualifications, and 
executing operations for various Protective Force (PF) activities.  In addition, the contractor will 
implement a risk-based approach to establish posts and patrols, optimizing resource utilization.  
The contractor will: 
a. Implement the requirements within 10 CFR §851, Worker Safety and Health Program; 
Appendix A to § 851, “Worker Safety and Health Functional Areas”; 10 CFR § 046, 
Medical, Physical Readiness, Training, and Access Authorization Standards for 
Protective Force Personnel; 10 CFR §1047, Limited Arrest Authority and Use of Force 
by Protective Force Officers; and 10 CFR §1049, Limited Arrest Authority and Use of 
Force by Protective Force Officers of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, as applicable. 
b. Management and Planning.  Contractors must establish and operate PF programs that 
align with DOE requirements.  This includes clearly identifying the protection mission, 
documenting resource needs, tracking personnel and equipment, and developing 
funding requirements. 
(1) PF planning is based on threat guidance and adversary capabilities. 
(2) Site-specific rules of engagement must be developed, incorporating the concept of 
hostile intent, considering protected assets, and establishing clear conditions for 
the use of deadly force, requiring approval from the ODFSA and local Office of 
General Counsel. 
(3) Contractors must develop site-specific fresh pursuit procedures, approved by the 
ODFSA, that guide PF personnel in pursuing suspected criminals across 
jurisdictional lines, emphasizing safety and legal considerations. 
(4) Contractors must develop formal officer-involved shooting procedures that 
provide clear guidance for PF personnel covering required actions, evidence 
preservation, reporting, and post-incident responsibilities.  These procedures must 
be submitted to the ODFSA for approval.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-5 
 
(5) Contractors must implement approved work stoppage contingency plans that are 
approved by the ODFSA. 
(6) Specialized functions (e.g., unmanned aerial systems or counter unmanned aerial 
systems operations) must conform to 10 U.S.C. § 6227, be based on identified 
risk, and be approved by the cognizant Program Secretarial Office. 
(a) Contractors must ensure personnel are trained and programs are approved 
by the ODFSA. 
a. Medical, Physical Readiness, and Training Requirements for PF Personnel.  The 
contractor must establish and implement medical, physical readiness, and training 
requirements to ensure that PF personnel can respond within site-specific response times 
in accordance with applicable regulations including 10 CFR § 1046.  These requirements 
should be based on a site-specific analysis approved by the ODSA and directed by the 
ODFSA.  Security police officers and candidates must demonstrate general fitness 
measures related to their site and position, including muscular strength, muscular 
endurance, aerobic endurance, anaerobic endurance, agility, power, and mobility. 
b. Duties.  The contractor must establish and implement PF duties in accordance with 
applicable regulations, site-specific operational needs, and threat determinations. 
c. Weapons and Munitions.  The contractor must establish and implement PF weapons and 
munitions requirements in accordance with applicable regulations. 
(1) Firearms Modifications.  The ODSA must provide written approval for 
firearms modifications. 
(2) Firearms and Munitions Handling and Storage.  The ODSA must approve the 
storage of firearms, ammunition, pyrotechnics, and explosives. 
(3) Firearms and Munitions Inventory.  The ODSA will approve the conduct and 
documentation for inventory of: 
(a) Firearms. 
(b) Ammunition, pyrotechnics, and explosives. 
(c) Firearms Safety.  The contractor must establish and implement PF 
Firearms Safety requirements in accordance with applicable regulations. 
a. Facilities and Equipment.  The contractor will establish and implement PF facilities and 
equipment requirements in accordance with applicable DOE regulations and site-specific 
threat analysis results. 
b. Performance Testing.  The contractor must test or assess site-specific essential PF job 
functions as outlined in the ODFSA approved security plan.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-6 08-05-2026 
 
14. PHYSICAL PROTECTION PROGRAM.  The contractor must set and maintain performance 
standards for all physical protection activities, based on DOE or Program Office guidance and 
local threat assessments, and supported by ODFSA-approved security analysis.  Measures should 
be risk-based, focusing resources on significant risks and tailoring systems to each asset’s 
vulnerabilities to support the facility mission. 
a. Physical Protection Planning.  The contractor must develop local physical protection 
strategies, incorporating security systems, documented in the ODFSA-approved site 
security plan.  All security strategies will be implemented in accordance with applicable 
federal regulations. 
b. The following plans, programs, and strategies must be developed locally, based on local 
analysis and under the direction of the ODSA.  They must be documented in an ODFSA-
approved site security plan in accordance with 32 CFR 2001.41: 
(1) Security locks and key program. 
(2) Physical barriers for classified information, safeguards information, and SNM. 
(3) Secure storage protection program. 
(4) Vault construction and protection. 
(5) Entry and exit screening plan. 
(6) Physical protection strategies for classified information and controlled 
unclassified information (CUI). 
(7) Physical protection strategies for assets. 
(8) Emergency response plan for security areas. 
(9) Protection measures for the transportation of SNM. 
(10) SNM storage locations and PF post-construction requirements. 
(11) Prohibited and controlled articles. 
(12) Posting requirements that comply with applicable federal regulations.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-7 
 
c. Physical Protection Systems (PPS). 
(1) The contractor must implement the design, protection measures, testing, and 
maintenance for PPS.  This may include PPS networks, physical access-control 
systems, intrusion detection systems, video assessment and surveillance systems, 
plans, procedures, equipment, and strategies as documented in the ODFSA-
approved site security plan. 
(2) Special Access Program Facilities and Sensitive Compartmented Information 
Facilities must adhere to applicable federal policies. 
15. VETTING. 
a. Personnel Security.  Requirements applicable to determining eligibility for access to 
classified information, including restricted data (RD) and SNM, are contained in Atomic 
Energy Act of 1954, as amended, EO 12968, EO 10865, EO 13467, 10 CFR §710, 
DOE O 472.2A, Personnel Security (current version), and various Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence directives. 
b. Badging. 
(1) The contractor will develop a site-specific Badge Program, utilizing a risk-based 
approach to determine credentialing and access requirements and will be 
documented in an ODFSA approved site security plan.  The Badge Program must 
align with the applicable Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 (HSPD-12) 
requirements that are outlined in DOE O 206.2, “Identity, Credential, and Access 
Management,” and DOE O 472.2A, “Personnel Security.” 
(2) The program should assess the level of risk associated with various roles and 
access areas, ensuring that badging procedures and access permissions are tailored 
to mitigate identified risks and support operational security needs. 
c. Human Reliability Program (HRP).  Requirements applicable to HRP are contained in 
10 CFR § 712, Human Reliability Program.  The contractor must ensure that only the 
minimum number of individuals necessary for effective operations are enrolled in the 
HRP.  The contractor shall periodically review the list of HRP position designations and 
enrolled individuals to ensure minimum number of participants for effective operations. 
16. INFORMATION SECURITY.  The contractor is responsible for establishing programs to 
safeguard and manage classified information and matter in accordance with applicable laws, 
regulations, EOs, government-wide policy directives and guidelines, as well as DOE policies and 
directives, which will be documented in an ODFSA-approved site security plan. 
a. Classification Program.  Requirements applicable to Classification Programs are 
contained in the Atomic Energy Act (RD, formerly restricted data [FRD], and 
transclassified foreign nuclear information [TFNI]), EO 13526 (National Security 
Information [NSI]), 10 CFR § 1045, 32 CFR § 2001, and DOE O 475.2B, Identifying 
Classified Information.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-8 08-05-2026 
 
b. Classified Matter Protection and Control.  Requirements applicable to marking, handling, 
protecting, storing, dispositioning, and destroying classified matter are contained in 
32 CFR § 2001, 32 CFR § 117, and 10 CFR § 1045. 
(1) The contractor will maintain a program that protects and controls classified matter 
based on federal requirements as implemented by ODFSA-approved security 
measures that result in protection, storage, or disposition effectiveness for 
classified matter. 
(2) Processes and procedures related to the protection and control of classified matter 
will be documented in an ODFSA-approved security plans and procedures, 
reference documents, and training material. 
c. Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information.  Requirements applicable to unclassified 
controlled nuclear information (UCNI) are contained in 10 CFR § 1017, Identification 
and Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information.  DOE federal and 
contractor employees must submit specific requests to deviate from the CFR to the 
Director, Office of Classification, for approval, in coordination with the Associate 
Administrator for Defense Nuclear Security for requests within NNSA. 
(1) The ODFSA-approved site security plan must establish the process for 
designating UCNI reviewing officials and prescribe procedures to be followed 
when UCNI guidance is unclear or when no applicable guidance exists. 
(2) Nomination.  An employee nominated to be a Reviewing Official must be 
competent in the subject areas in which the authority will be used and familiar 
with DOE UCNI policy, procedures, and guidance. 
(3) Headquarters.  The immediate supervisor of an employee being nominated for 
Reviewing Official Authority must submit the required information identified in 
paragraph 16.c.(5), below, through the Headquarters Classification 
Representative. 
(4) Field.  The immediate supervisor of an employee being nominated for Reviewing 
Official authority must submit the information identified in paragraph 16.c(5) 
below to the Classification Officer or, if there is no Classification Officer, to the 
Director, Office of Classification, for DOE elements or to the Associate 
Administrator for Defense Nuclear Security for NNSA elements. 
(5) Required Information. 
(a) The employee’s name, organization, mailing address, telephone number, 
and e-mail address. 
(b) Subject areas in which the authority will be used.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-9 
 
(c) Desired jurisdiction. 
(d) Any special limitations on the authority. 
(6) Training.  The nominated employee must successfully complete the training for 
Reviewing Official Authority prior to appointment, which must include a 
practical examination using applicable UCNI guidance and applying UCNI 
markings.  The required training and/or examination may be waived if the 
nominated employee has completed the training and/or examination within the 
last three years.  However, the expiration date for the authority must be no longer 
than three years from the most recent successfully completed training. 
(7) Appointment.  The appointment must be in writing and must provide a description 
of the authority that includes the individual’s name, organization, the effective 
date, the specific subject areas covered by the authority, the jurisdiction of the 
authority, the expiration date, and any special instructions or limitations on the 
authority.  The appointing official must notify the employee and the employee’s 
supervisor.  At Headquarters, the appointing official must also notify the 
Headquarters Classification Representative. 
(8) Authority Limitations.  An employee may exercise his or her Reviewing Official 
authority only in the specific subject areas and jurisdiction covered in his or her 
authority description and in keeping with any special limitations imposed.  The 
employee may not redelegate the authority.  If an employee changes positions, the 
employee may retain the Reviewing Official authority with written approval of 
their new supervisor.  The supervisor must then notify the appointing official of 
this action. 
(9) Reappointment.  If the authority is still needed after the initial three-year period, 
the employee must successfully complete an examination that retests his or her 
proficiency in using UCNI guidance and applying UCNI markings.  If this 
examination is not successfully completed before the authority expires, the 
appointing official may grant a one-time three-month extension of the authority.  
If the examination is not successfully completed by the end of the three-month 
extension, the authority must be terminated. 
(10) Cancellation of Authority.  An employee’s supervisor, the Classification Officer, 
or the appointing official may cancel this authority when an employee no longer 
requires such authority or if the employee does not exercise the authority 
reliability.  Notification must be made to the employee and other parties identified 
above of the cancellation and effective date. 
d. Controlled Unclassified Information.  Requirements applicable to CUI are contained in 
32 CFR § 2002, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI).

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-10 08-05-2026 
 
e. Operations Security.  Develop Operations Security plans at the direction of the ODSA 
and document them in local procedures to integrate with applicable programs to protect 
identified critical program information as set forth in the National Security Presidential 
Memorandum-28.  Threat analysis will be documented in the ODFSA approved site 
security plan. 
17. TECHNICAL SECURITY.  Requirements applicable to the Technical Security Program are 
contained in DOE O 470.6, Technical Security Program, current version. 
18. NUCLEAR MATERIAL CONTROL AND ACCOUNTABILITY (MC&A).  Contractors must 
establish an ODFSA approved graded MC&A program for controlling, accounting for, and 
safeguarding SNM and other accountable nuclear material. 
f. The Nuclear Materials Management and Safeguards System User Guide is used for 
nuclear materials management and Safeguards System reporting and data submission. 
g. For DOE to Department of War (DoW) weapons transfers, SNM in weapons must not be 
transferred to DoW under 42 U.S.C. § 2121(b), “Material for Department of Defense 
Use,” until DOE has received direction from the President. 
h. Program Management.  The contractor will develop a detailed ODFSA approved MC&A 
Plan that outlines specific roles, responsibilities, training, and procedures to promote 
clarity and accountability.  The program should document control measures and program 
elements, be graded based on potential loss consequences, monitor effectiveness and 
respond to loss indicators, and integrate with S&S programs.  This structured approach 
reduces confusion and ensures that all personnel are aware of their duties, leading to 
more efficient operations. 
i. Material Accounting.  Each facility will have a system that tracks SNM inventories, 
documenting SNM transactions, issuing periodic reports, and assisting with the detection 
of unauthorized system access, data falsification, and SNM gains or losses.  Each facility 
must have an accountability system that provides continuity of knowledge for SNM from 
receipt or production to disposition and include access authorization to the accountability 
system.  Each facility must be able to produce an inventory of all nuclear material in the 
accountability system upon request.  The accountability system will be maintained and 
updated in a timely manner, as approved by the MC&A Plan.  Material Balance Areas 
(MBAs) shall be used to identify the location and quantity of SNM and collocate credible 
substitution material in the facility.  An MBA is an area that is both a subsidiary account 
of material within the accounting system at a facility and a specified geographical area 
that has defined boundaries.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-11 
 
j. Material Control.  Contractors must implement a Material Control Program consistent 
with the graded safeguards concept to prevent unauthorized removal of SNM. 
(1) Ensure each facility implements a Material Control Program concept to ensure 
that SNM is not removed from an authorized location without approval or timely 
detection of an unauthorized removal. 
(a) This includes access controls, material surveillance, material containment, 
detection and assessment, portal monitoring, and incident reporting 
and response. 
k. Measurements.  Ensure all facilities possessing SNM implement Measurements and 
Measurement Control programs.  The Measurements program must provide measured 
values with uncertainties sufficient to detect theft or diversion of SNM.  The 
Measurement Control program must ensure the quality of measurements made for 
MC&A purposes.  The Measurement program elements include measurement types, 
methods, control, and bulk sampling.  Measurements are required as directed in the 
MC&A Plan.  Category IV sites, where roll-up to Category III has been deemed not-
credible and items are not susceptible to theft or diversion, as determined by a 
vulnerability assessment, may be excluded from the requirements of section 1(g). 
l. Physical Inventory.  A physical inventory program for SNM must be implemented to 
confirm materials are in their stated quantities and authorized locations, and to detect 
unauthorized removals or discrepancies.  The Physical Inventory Program: 
(1) Will be conducted at a frequency approved by the ODFSA. 
(2) Outlines procedures for conducting, verifying, and reconciling inventories. 
(3) Ensures that discrepancies between the physical inventory and the accounting 
records system are detected and resolved. 
(4) Include periodic physical inventories, special inventories, and International 
Atomic Energy Agency inventories (if applicable) 
(5) The risk associated with substitution material should be considered in the facility 
Physical Inventory Plan. 
Table 1. Special nuclear materials. 
Material Type 
Accountable 
Quantity 
Weight Field 
Used for Element 
Weight Field Used for 
Isotope 
Material 
Type Code 
Enriched Uranium 
(U-235) 
1 gram Total U U-235 20 
Uranium-2333 1 gram Total U U-233 70 
Plutonium-2421 (Pu) 1 gram Total Pu Pu-242 40 
Plutonium-239–241 1 gram Total Pu Pu-239 + Pu-241 50

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I– Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.7 
Page 2-I-12 08-05-2026 
 
Material Type 
Accountable 
Quantity 
Weight Field 
Used for Element 
Weight Field Used for 
Isotope 
Material 
Type Code 
Plutonium-2382 1/10 of a gram Total Pu Pu-238 83 
Uranium in cascades 1 gram Total U U-235 89 
1 Account as Pu-242 (MT 40) if the contained Pu-242 is 20% or greater of total plutonium by weight; otherwise, account as 
Pu-239-241 (MT 50). 
2 Account as Pu-238 (MT 83) if the contained Pu-238 is 10% or greater of total plutonium by weight; otherwise, account as 
Pu-239-241 (MT 50). 
3 Account as U-233 (MT 70) if the contained U-233 is 10% or greater of total uranium by weight; otherwise, account as 
U235 (MT 10, 20, or 81). 
When separated, Am and Np must be controlled and accounted for as required by Attachment 2, Chapter I of this Order. 
 
Table 2. Controlled and accounted for as SNM 
Material Type Accountable Quantity 
Weight Field 
Used for 
Element 
Weight Field 
Used for Isotope 
Material 
Type Code 
Americium-241**(Am) 1 gram Total Am Am-241 44 
Americium-243** 1 gram Total Am Am-243 45 
Neptunium-237** (Np) 1 gram Total Np - 82 
** Americium and Np-237 contained in SNM are not required to be accounted for until separated. If separated, these 
materials must be controlled and accounted for as SNM. 
 
Table 3. Graded safeguards 
Graded Safeguards Table 
Material Types 
Attractiveness 
Level3 
Pu/U-2332 Category (kg) 
Contained U- 235/Separated Np- 
237/Separated Am-241 and 
Am-243 Category (kg) 
I II III IV1 I II III IV1 
WEAPONS 
Assembled weapons 
and test devices 
A All N/A N/A N/A All N/A N/A N/A 
PURE PRODUCTS 
Pits, major 
components, button 
ingots, recastable 
metal, directly 
convertible materials 
B ≥2 ≥0.4 <2 ≥0.2 
<0.4 <0.2 ≥5 ≥1<5 ≥0.4 
<1 <0.4 
HIGH-GRADE 
MATERIALS 
Carbides, oxides, 
nitrates, solutions 
(≥25 g/L) etc.; fuel 
elements and 
assemblies; alloys and 
mixtures; UF4 or UF6 
(≥50% enriched) 
C ≥6 ≥2<6 ≥0.4 <2 <0.4 ≥20 ≥6 
<20 ≥2 <6 <2

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 470.7 Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-13 
 
Graded Safeguards Table 
Material Types 
Attractiveness 
Level3 
Pu/U-2332 Category (kg) 
Contained U- 235/Separated Np- 
237/Separated Am-241 and 
Am-243 Category (kg) 
I II III IV1 I II III IV1 
LOW-GRADE 
MATERIALS 
UF4 or UF6 (≥20% and 
<50% enriched); 
Solutions (1– 25 g/L); 
process residues 
requiring extensive 
reprocessing; Pu-238 
(except waste) 
D N/A ≥16 ≥3 <16 <3 N/A ≥50 ≥8 <50 <8 
ALL OTHER 
MATERIALS 
Highly irradiated 
forms, solutions 
(<1 g/L), compounds; 
uranium containing 
<20% U-235 or <10% 
U-233(any form, any 
quantity) 
E N/A N/A N/A Reportable 
Quantities N/A N/A N/A Reportable 
Quantities 
1 The lower limit for Category IV is equa l to reportable quantities in this Order. 
2 In items that contain U-233 and U-235, if the contained U-233 is 10% or greater of total uranium by weight, then the 
effective quantity of U-233 = (contained U-233 + contained U-235).  The category is then determined by using the 
effective quantity of U-233 compared with the Pu/U-233 side of the table. 
3 Attractiveness level descriptions are examples only and not a ll inclusive.  Additional examples appropriate to a given site 
should be included in the Nuclear Material Control and Accountability plan. 
4 Directions for determining the material category when mu ltiple material types and attractiveness levels are being 
considered can be found in DOE-STD-1194. 
 
Table 4. Factors for calculating effective quantities 
Attractiveness Level Pu/U-233 Factor 
Contained U-235/Separated 
Np-237/Separated Am-241 and Am-243 
Factor 
B 1 1 
C 1/3 1/4
