--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of the Chief Information Officer 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDE R 
Washington, DC 
 Approved: 2-3-2022 
SUBJECT: CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION 
1. PURPOSE. Establish the Department of Energy’s (DOE) Controlled Unclassified
Information (CUI) Program and document a policy for designating and handling
information that qualifies as CUI. The CUI Program standardizes the way DOE handles
information that requires protection under laws, regulations, or Government-wide
policies (LRGWP), but that does not qualify as classified under Executive Order (EO)
13526, Classified National Security Information, 12-29-2009 (3 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR), 2010 Comp., p. 298-327), or any predecessor or successor order, or
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011, et seq.), as amended. This Directive
implements the requirements in EO 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, and 32
CFR part 2002, Controlled Unclassified Information.
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES. DOE Order (O) 471.3 Chg. 1, Identifying and Protecting
Official Use Only Information, dated 1-13-2011, and DOE Manual (M) 471.3-1 Chg. 1,
Manual for Identifying and Protecting Official Use Only Information, dated 1-13-2011.
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable
or substitute a new set of requirements.
3. APPLICABILITY.
a. Departmental  Applicability. This directive applies to all Departmental Elements.
(1) The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration
(NNSA) must ensure that NNSA employees comply with their
responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this directive will be
construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under
section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish Administration-
specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary.
(2) The Administrator of Bonneville Power Administration must ensure that
its employees and contractors comply with their respective responsibilities
under this directive.
b. DOE Contractors. The Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), Attachment 1,
sets forth requirements of this Order that apply to certain Management and
Operating (M&O) contracts and non-M&O Major Site/Facility contracts as
determined by the Heads of Departmental Elements (HDEs).
DOE O 471.7

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 471.7.
(1) A request for an exemption from this Directive  or an equivalency
determination over all or some of the Element’s CUI marking,
safeguarding, and destruction requirements while the CUI remains within
DOE control should be submitted for approval to the Departmental
Element Designated CUI Official. Reports of approved equivalencies and
exemptions must be sent to the Senior Agency Official (SAO) for CUI to
maintain visibility over the equivalencies and exemptions. Such requests
must:
(a) Identify the requirement for which an equivalency or exemption is
being requested;
(b) The rationale as to why the equivalency or exemption is needed;
and
(c) The alternate steps to be taken to ensure sufficient protection .
(2) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities
assigned by Executive Order 12344, codified at 50 USC sections 2406 and
2511 and to ensure consistency throughout the joint Navy/DOE Naval
Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval
Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements and
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director's
cognizance, as deemed appropriate.
4. REQUIREMENTS.
a. Identifying Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI). CUI is information the
Government creates or possesses, or that an entity creates or possesses for or on
behalf of the Government, that a LRGWP requires or permits an agency to handle
using safeguarding or dissemination controls.
(1) CUI categories approved by National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA), the CUI Executive Agent (EA), published in the
CUI Registry, and authorized for DOE use, are the exclusive designations
for identifying CUI within DOE.
(2) No other safeguarding and dissemination controls can be implemented for
any controlled unclassified information other than those permitted by the
applicable LRGWP and as indicated in the CUI Registry. The CUI
Registry can be found at https://www.archives.gov/cui.
(3) DOE personnel who have a Lawful Government Purpose (LGP) can be
authorized holders and identify information as CUI, according to 32 CFR
part 2002.30 (refer to Section 2002.4(bb) definition of Lawful
Government Purpose), unless the applicable LRGWP imposes additional

--- page 3 ---
3 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
requirements. However, authorized holders may only handle CUI when 
furthering a LGP. At DOE, an authorized holder’s LGP may be defined by 
DOE policy, position descriptions, or contractual requirements.  
(4) For information to be identified as CUI, it must be designated as either of
the two types of CUI: CUI Basic or CUI Specified.
(a) CUI Basic is the subset of CUI for which the authorizing LRGWP
does not set out specific safeguarding or dissemination controls.
CUI Basic is handled according to the uniform set of controls in 32
CFR part 2002, this Directive, and the CUI Registry. If
safeguarding and dissemination controls are not contained in the
LRGWP, CUI Basic controls apply.
(b) CUI Specified is the subset of CUI in which the authorizing
LRGWP contains specific handling controls that it requires or
permits agencies to use, and which differ from those controls for
CUI Basic. Safeguarding and dissemination controls contained in
LRGWP take precedence over the requirements in 32 CFR part
2002. CUI Basic controls apply whenever CUI Specified controls
do not cover the involved CUI.
(5) If new Categories of CUI are needed, the Departmental Element’s
Designated CUI Official must submit a request for consideration to the
DOE SAO for CUI, who will then submit the request to NARA. The
request must contain the following information, as applicable:
(a) The information type that requires protection;
(b) The commitment to sponsor or issue a LRGWP or a citation to an
existing LRGWP;
(c) The anticipated date or timeframe for the release of the proposed
LRGWP related to the information; and
(d) Any supporting authorities that help establish the need or
justification for the proposed LRGWP, any drafts of the proposed
authority DOE plans to develop, information on any development
steps already undertaken and where DOE is in the development
process for the proposed authority, and any other relevant
information.
b. CUI Specified. This section identifies CUI Specified commonly used within
DOE. Additional categories of CUI Specified are identified in the CUI Registry
and in DOE program guidance.
(1) Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information (UCNI). Requirements for
the identification and protection of UCNI are contained in section 148 of

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
t
he Atomic Energy Act, Title 10 CFR, part 1017, Identification and 
Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information; and DOE O 
471.1, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear 
Information, current version. 
(2) Privacy Information. Requirements for the marking and safeguarding of
personally identifiable information (PII) under CUI are outlined in DOE O
206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version. PII must
be handled in accordance to the level of sensitivity, with more sensitive
categories, i.e., Social Security Numbers, financial records, and medical
records, being safeguarded through encryption or password-protection.
Privacy information, in either physical or electronic format, which is
collected, used, processed, maintained, stored, shared, or transferred
within DOE should be marked and safeguarded under the requirements of
this Directive and 32 CFR part 2002. CUI Specified markings may be
applicable under the Privacy Act of 1974 (Title 5 U.S. C. 522a) or Office
of Management and Budget directives.
(3) Export Controlled Information. Information (which may include
technology, technical data, assistance or software), the export (including,
as applicable, transfer to foreign nationals within the United States) of
which is controlled under the “Export Administration Regulations”
(maintained by the U.S. Department of Commerce), the “International
Traffic in Arms Regulations” (maintained by the U.S. Department of
State), “10 CFR Part 810, Assistance to Foreign Atomic Energy
Activities” regulations (maintained by the U.S. Department of Energy), or
various trade and economic sanctions (maintained by the U.S. Department
of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control).
(4) Unclassified Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information (U-NNPI). U-NNPI is
unclassified information concerning the design, arrangement,
development, manufacture, testing, operation, administration, training,
maintenance, and repair of the propulsion plants of naval nuclear-powered
ships and prototypes, including the associated shipboard and shore-based
nuclear support facilities.
c. Access and Sharing .
(1) Access to CUI is restricted in accordance with applicable LRGWP that
requires it.
(2) CUI may only be disseminated and shared with persons in accordance
with an LGP and who are eligible for access under applicable LRGWP.
(3) CUI must not be released through unapproved methods (e.g., posted on a
publicly accessible website). All procedures for public release of CUI,
except for those under the Privacy Act, the Freedom of Information Act

--- page 5 ---
5 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(FOIA), and Mandatory Declassification Reviews (MDR) procedures, of 
CUI must be approved by the Departmental Element Designated CUI 
Official. 
(4) When transmitting CUI by mail, it can be shipped through interagency
mail systems, United States Postal Service (USPS), or other commercial
delivery services, consistent with other provisions of law. In-transit
automated tracking and accountability tools can be used to record the
location of the CUI Specified. Furthermore, while CUI documents and
matter being mailed must be properly labeled, the wrapping or package
containing the CUI must not indicate the presence of CUI. The wrapping
or package should indicate "Open by Addressee Only" to ensure it is only
opened by the intended recipient.
(5) When sending CUI via email to accounts outside of Federal IT systems the
CUI must be in an attachment and protected by encryption or password
protection unless the authorized holder assesses that the immediate
mission and business needs outweigh any risk of sending the email
without encryption or password protection. In such situations, authorized
holders may be required by their supervisor to provide a written statement
regarding their determination. The password must be transmitted
separately from the email attachment containing CUI (e.g., by phone or
text).
(6) For phone transmission, encryption is not required. However, authorized
holders should consider if the sensitivity of the CUI merits encryption
when discussed over the phone. Additionally, CUI Specified may have
additional encryption requirements based on a LRGWP.
(7) Only the approved Limited Dissemination Controls listed on the CUI
Registry may be applied to limit or specify CUI dissemination. However,
authorized holders should be aware of additional dissemination controls
that may be authorized or permitted by LRGWP [e.g., UCNI, Export
Controlled Information (ECI)].
(8) CUI Privacy information maintained in Privacy Act systems of records
may be subject to additional controls if there is information in the records
governed by other CUI categories.
(9) The presence or marking of documents and matter containing CUI does
not impact the review or release of the document and matter under the
Privacy Act (5 USC 552a), FOIA (5 USC 552), or MDRs under EO
13526, Classified National Security Information; and 10 CFR part 1045,
Nuclear Classification and Declassification. DOE Privacy Act procedures
are governed by DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program,
current version, and DOE FOIA procedures are contained in 10 CFR part
1004. Mandatory Declassification Review Procedures are contained in

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
10
 CFR part 1045 and DOE O 475.2, Identifying Classified Information, 
current version.  
(10) When determining whether to disclose information in response to a FOIA,
Privacy, or MDR request, the decision must be based on the content of the
information and applicability of any FOIA or Privacy equivalencies and
exemptions, regardless of whether an agency designates or marks the
information as CUI.
(11) All documents and matter must be reviewed to ensure they do not contain
CUI prior to public release. CUI must be removed or decontrolled from
documents prior to public release.
(12) When intending to share CUI with a non- executive branch entity, there
should be a formal agreement whenever feasible. At a minimum, the
agreement must include provisions that state:
(a) Non-executive branch entities must handle CUI in accordance with
EO 13556, 32 CFR part 2002, this Directive, and the CUI Registry;
(b) Misuse of CUI is subject to penalties established in applicable
LRGWP; and
(c) The non-executive branch entity must report any non-compliance
with handling requirements to the disseminating office using
methods approved by the SAO for CUI.
(13) When an agency cannot enter into agreement but is required to
disseminate CUI to non-executive branch entities, it must be
communicated to the recipient that the Government strongly encourages
the non-executive branch entity to protect CUI in accordance with EO
13556, 32 CFR part 2002, this Directive, and the CUI Registry, and that
such protections should accompany the CUI if the entity disseminates it
further.
(14) A waiver providing equivalencies and exemptions on encryption can be
requested from the Departmental Element’s Designated CUI Official.
When CUI is reproduced (e.g., copy, scan, print, electronically duplicate)
or shared in furtherance of an LGP, it must be marked and protected in the
same way as the original CUI document.
(15) When reproducing CUI on equipment such as printers, copiers, scanners,
or fax machines, ensure to the extent possible the equipment does not
retain the copied data or CUI but may retain other unrelated data, and that
the equipment is sanitized in accordance with NIST (SP) 800-53 and NIST
SP 800-88. Consideration should be given to a phased implementation on
procuring the required equipment authorized to hold CUI.

--- page 7 ---
7 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
d. Destruction.
(1) The decision to dispose of any DOE or NNSA document, whether it
contains CUI information or not, must be managed in accordance with its
NARA approved records schedule, consistent with the policies and
procedures for records disposition, as outlined in DOE O 243.1, Records
Management Program, current version.
(2) Destruction of CUI, including paper copy or stored in any electronic form/
format (e.g., removable media, backup systems, cloud), must be
accomplished according to a NARA approved records schedule, and if
determined to be a temporary record, should be disposed of in a manner
that makes it unreadable, indecipherable, and irrecoverable. When CUI
Specified information is to be destroyed and the applicable LRGWP
specifies destruction requirements, the LRGWP must be followed.
(3) Electronic media must be destroyed in accordance with NIST SP 800-53,
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
Organizations, or successor standard and NIST SP 800-88, or successor
standard. It may also be destroyed through any method of destruction
approved for Classified National Security Information (32 CFR 2001.47 or
any implementing or successor guidance).
(4) For paper destruction, one of two methods must be used: single-step paper
destruction or multi-step paper destruction methods.
(5) For the single-step paper destruction method, agencies must:
(a) Employ cross-cut shredders that produce 1 mm x 5 mm (0.04 in. x
0.2 in.) particles (or smaller); or
(b) Pulverize / disintegrate paper using disintegrator devices equipped
with a 3/32 in. (2.4 mm) security screen. (National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) SP 800-88, Rev 1, Guidelines
for Media Sanitization, Table A-1: Hard Copy Storage
Sanitization)
(6) The National Security Agency (NSA) maintains an Evaluated Products
List (EPL) of equipment that is authorized for destroying hard copy
(paper) Classified National Security Information. This equipment also
meets CUI single-step paper destruction standards. The most updated NSA
EPL for paper shredders can be found at: https://www.nsa.gov/.
(7) Crosscut shredders purchased prior to the issuance of this Directive and
not identified on the NSA EPL, may continue to be used for the
destruction of CUI paper matter and non-paper products, excluding
microfilm. However, these shredders must be replaced once they become
unserviceable or after 5 years after the effective date of this Order.

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(8
) The multi-step paper destruction method may also be used. See
Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO) CUI Notice 2019-03:
Destroying Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) in Paper Form, or
successor guidance, for specific requirements on the single-step and multi-
step paper destruction methods.
(9) If there is a lack of capability to destroy CUI as outlined in this Directive,
then an exemption or equivalency may be requested from the
Departmental Element Designated CUI Official in order to pursue an
alternative destruction method.
e. Marking. Detailed marking requirements are contained in the CUI Marking
Handbook on the CUI Registry. The CUI Marking Handbook and the CUI
Registry can be found at https://www.archives.gov/.
(1) Documents marked under LRGWP are not considered legacy documents
and do not need to be reviewed or re-marked except as required under
LRGWP. Other documents and matter generated prior to issuance of this
Directive or that are maintained in files to which access is restricted (e.g.,
personnel files) are not required to be reviewed and brought to current
standards unless they (or a copy of such document and matter) is/are
removed from restricted access files and not to be returned; are distributed
outside of DOE; or if a new document and matter is created using
information from a legacy document and matter that qualifies as CUI. If
any of these conditions are met, then legacy markings must be removed or
redacted, the document and matter reviewed, and then re-marked as CUI
(if applicable), even if the information was under a legacy material
marking equivalency and exemption prior to re-use. In the event legacy
documents and matter are not designated or re-marked but are distributed
outside of DOE, an equivalency and exemption from the SAO for CUI
may be sought to utilize Standard Form (SF) 901 as the cover sheet to
indicate that the legacy documents and matter contain CUI. SF 901 may
be found at https://www.gsa.gov/.
(2) Documents and matter (including legacy documents and matter) whose
marking is governed by a LRGWP must continue to be marked as required
under the LRGWP.
(3) When information is designated as CUI, but it is determined that marking
it as CUI is excessively burdensome, an equivalency and exemption can
be requested from the Departmental Element’s Designated CUI Official. If
marking information as CUI requires cost and resource considerations that
Departmental Elements may not be able to address, then it can be deemed
as excessively burdensome. The request must include a rationale for the
equivalency and exemption and alternate steps to be taken to ensure
sufficient protection. However, if information that is designated as CUI is
transmitted to another Departmental Element, it must be appropriately

--- page 9 ---
9 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
marked as CUI. If it is excessively burdensome to mark every document 
and matter being sent to another Departmental Element within DOE, then 
the SF-901 cover sheet can instead be used to indicate there is CUI within 
the document and matter. Only the CUI EA-approved cover sheet, SF 901, 
may be used with no substitutes.  
(4) CUI in physical form must be maintained in a controlled environment and
is not required to be brought to current marking standards unless removed
or transmitted outside of the controlled space. However, any document
and matter removed from these controlled environments and not to be
returned (or a copy of such document and matter) must be reviewed to
determine whether it contains CUI and, if appropriate, marked. A
controlled environment is defined as any area or space an authorized
holder deems to have adequate physical or procedural controls (e.g.,
barriers or managed access controls) to protect CUI from unauthorized
access or disclosure.
(5) Only CUI markings listed in the CUI Registry are authorized for use when
designating unclassified information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls.
(6) All CUI must be marked with a CUI Banner Marking, which may include
up to three elements:
(a) The CUI Control marking consisting of the acronym “CUI”. This
is mandatory for all CUI, Basic and Specified.
(b) The CUI Category marking, as published in the CUI Registry. This
is mandatory for CUI Specified.
(c) Limited Dissemination Control marking, as published in the CUI
Registry. This is not mandatory and should be applied consistent
with guidance from the applicable Departmental Element’s
Designated CUI Official.
(7) All documents containing CUI must indicate who designated the CUI. At
a minimum, the organization originating the information must be
identified on the front of the document. In cases where the organization is
not sufficient to identify a person with whom to discuss the determination,
the name of an individual may also be identified, if appropriate.
(8) When marking decontrolled CUI, the document and matter must clearly
indicate that the CUI is no longer controlled when restating, paraphrasing,
re-using, releasing it to the public, or donating it to a private institution.
(9) Portion marking is not required.

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(
10) Special format items (e.g., film, photos, removable media) are required to
have CUI markings. In accordance with CUI Notice 2019-01, SF 902 and
SF 903 are the authorized labels used to identify the presence of CUI in a
special format. The use of these SF is optional. SF 902 and SF 903 may be
found at https://isoo.blogs.archives.gov/. Alternate marking/accountability
shall be determined by the Departmental Element Designated CUI Official
when applying CUI marking is not feasible.
(11) The use of cover sheets is optional unless directed by the Departmental
Element Designated CUI Official. Any person who designates documents
and matter as CUI may use cover sheets for CUI. Cover sheets may be
used to identify CUI, alert observers that CUI is present from a distance,
and serve as a shield to protect the attached CUI from inadvertent
disclosure. Only the CUI EA-approved cover sheet, SF 901, may be used.
SF 901 may be found at: https://www.gsa.gov/. Regardless of the use of
cover sheets, documents and matter containing CUI must still be marked
as required.
(12) To the extent possible, avoid commingling National Security Information
(NSI), Restricted Data (RD), Formerly Restricted Data (FRD), or
Transclassified Foreign Nuclear Information (TFNI) with CUI in the same
document and matter.
(13) Under 10 CFR part 1045, CUI markings are not required for documents
containing RD or FRD that are not portion marked.
(14) When it is not practical to avoid commingling and CUI is contained in
documents and matter containing NSI, RD, FRD, TFNI that are portion
marked, the requirements of 32 CFR part 2002, CUI Notice 2018-05, and
10 CFR part 1045 apply as follows:
(a) A warning/informational box or section on the cover or first page
of the classified document to convey that CUI is present in the
document and matter with a statement that reads, “This document
and matter contains CUI [List all CUI Specified categories and
limited dissemination control markings], and must be reviewed and
appropriately marked when declassified under DOE O 475.2B,
Identifying Classified Information."
(b) For portions containing CUI, any limited dissemination
instruction(s) must be indicated and for Specified CUI, the
appropriate category(ies) must be included.
(c) For portion marked RD, FRD, or TFNI documents commingled
with CUI, if decontrol instructions apply, the decontrol instructions
must not appear on the front page. Where they appear, decontrol

--- page 11 ---
11 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
instructions must clearly be labeled as decontrol instructions for 
the CUI portions only. 
(15) CUI documents and matter that are expected to be revised prior to the
preparation of a finished product for dissemination or retention (e.g., all
documents to include: Draft, Pre-decisional, etc.) must be marked with the
date created or the date of the last change and with "CUI" and any CUI
Specified contained in the document and matter. If not destroyed, the
document and matter must be marked as final when:
(a) Released by the originator outside the originating activity;
(b) Retained more than 180 days from the date of origin or last
change; or
(c) Filed according to the applicable records control schedule.
(16) The following administrative markings may be used for CUI within DOE.
No other administrative markings may be used unless approved and
promulgated within DOE by the DOE SAO for CUI:
(a) Predecisional
(b) Deliberative
(c) Draft
(d) Must be reviewed prior to public release
(17) Email messages must include a Banner Marking to indicate that the email
contains CUI. If the message itself is not CUI but contains an attachment
with CUI, the message must indicate that the attachment is CUI and that
when separated the email does not contain CUI. The attachment must have
all required CUI markings.
(18) Scientific and Technical Information (STI) documents and matter being
submitted to the Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) for
subsequent announcement, availability, and preservation, in accordance
with DOE O 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information Management,
current version, should be appropriately marked. Inform OSTI when STI
previously announced or submitted to OSTI has been modified.
(19) If a determination to change the CUI marking (which would include
adding or removing limited dissemination controls) further limits access to
the document, to the extent possible, the person making the change must
notify persons to whom the document was distributed to of the change, to
ensure the information is not provided to unauthorized persons. There is
no need for notification unless the change impacts access.

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(
20) Documents from closed or inactive sites should be reviewed and re-
marked or decontrolled by the document custodian before distributing to
another DOE entity or releasing it to the public.
f. Safeguarding. Safeguarding requirements for CUI depend on whether the CUI is
Basic or Specified. CUI Specified must be safeguarded in accordance with
requirements in applicable LRGWP. If safeguarding requirements are not
addressed in LRGWP (e.g. CUI Basic), there must be reasonable precautions to
guard against unauthorized disclosure of CUI. At a minimum, safeguarding
measures must include the following precautions:
(1) Safeguard CUI documents and matter in accordance with the requirements
of this Directive and the underlying LRGWP as indicated in the CUI
Registry.
(2) Establish controlled environments in which to protect CUI from
unauthorized access or disclosure and make use of those controlled
environments.
(3) Reasonably ensure that unauthorized individuals cannot access or observe
CUI. To the extent possible, ensure unauthorized individuals cannot
inadvertently overhear conversations discussing CUI.
(4) Keep CUI under authorized holder’s direct control or protect it with at
least one physical barrier, and reasonably ensure that the authorized holder
or the physical barrier protects the CUI from unauthorized access or
observation when outside a controlled environment. Examples of physical
barriers include: sealed envelopes and areas equipped with electronic
locks. Additionally, locked doors, overhead bins, drawers, and file
cabinets can also serve as a physical barrier.
(5) CUI may be processed, stored, or transmitted on both federal information
systems operated by DOE and by a contractor on behalf of DOE. Because
the confidentiality impact value for CUI is no lower than moderate in
accordance with FIPS Publication 199, systems containing CUI must
ensure proper controls are implemented according to NIST SP 800-53 Rev
5, or successor standard, in alignment with 205.1C, Department of Energy
Cybersecurity Program, current version.
(6) CUI stored on non-federal information systems must follow the
requirements of NIST SP 800-171, Protecting Controlled Unclassified
Information in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations, in order to protect
CUI, unless specific requirements are specified by LRGWP for protecting
the information.
(7) Ensure that if an unmarked document and matter is believed to contain
CUI, the unmarked document and matter is protected as CUI until it can
be reviewed to determine if it contains CUI.

--- page 13 ---
13 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(8) Legacy documents and matter that will retain Official Use Only (OUO)
markings or have not been reviewed to determine if they contain CUI
should also be safeguarded in accordance with the requirements
established in this Directive. If safeguarding requirements cannot be met,
alternate plans for appropriately protecting documents and matter that may
potentially contain CUI must be developed. This alternate protection plan
must be approved by the Departmental Element Designated CUI Official
or delegate.
(9) Permanent burial is an option that may be approved by the Departmental
Element Designated CUI Official for permanent placement of CUI
materials, excluding records.
g. CUI Training.
(1) All employees who have access to CUI must be trained on appropriate
handling procedures and requirements within six months after the CUI
Training Program becomes available and once every two years thereafter.
(2) New employees who have access to CUI, including interns and those on
short-term detail and assignments, must be trained upon initial
employment and once every two years thereafter.
(3) CUI training will address the following CUI items and activities from a
DOE-wide perspective:
(a) Identification;
(b) Marking;
(c) Access;
(d) Transmission;
(e) Protection;
(f) Destruction; and
(g) Challenges.
(4) Any employee who has access to or marks CUI must receive training on
designating CUI, relevant CUI categories, the CUI Registry, associated
markings, and applicable safeguarding, disseminating, and decontrolling
policies and procedures.

--- page 14 ---
14 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
h. Decontrolling CUI.
(1) Documents and matter marked as containing CUI must be reviewed by the
disseminating office prior to public release to ensure it does not contain
CUI by removing the CUI, decontrolling the CUI, or determining that the
information is not exempt from public release, and the CUI markings must
be removed.
(2) Unless decontrol authority is governed by LRGWP, only the
disseminating office can decontrol documents and matter marked as
containing CUI, and must coordinate decontrolling with other cognizant
offices, when necessary.
(3) Transferring records to NARA .
(a) When feasible, records containing CUI must be decontrolled prior
to transferring to NARA.
(b) When records cannot be decontrolled before transferring to
NARA, it must be indicated on a Transfer Request (TR) in
NARA’s Electronic Records Archives (ERA) or on an SF 258
paper transfer form, that the records should continue to be
controlled as CUI (subject to NARA’s regulation on transfer,
public availability, and access: See 38 CFR parts 1235, 1250, and
1256).
(c) For hard copy transfer, do not place a CUI marking on the outside
of the container.
i. Self-Inspection.
(1) There must be an annual self-inspection of the DOE CUI Program. This
will be conducted through the CUI SAO selection of a group of
Departmental Elements to serve as a representative sample of the entire
Department. Each year, there will be a new group of Departmental
Elements selected. Self-inspections will occur through predictive cycles.
(2) Program A ssessments.
(a) The Departmental Element Designated CUI Official ensures the
annual assessment is conducted.
(b) Annual assessment of the CUI program must evaluate the
following:
1 Training,
2 Identification,

--- page 15 ---
15 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022
3 Marking, and 
4 Safeguarding. 
(3) Self-inspections of the CUI program of the Office of Inspector General
(OIG) can only be conducted by OIG personnel.
j. Challenges.
(1) DOE personnel who, in good faith, believe that designation of CUI is
improper or incorrect, or who believe they have received unmarked CUI,
may submit a challenge to their Departmental Element Designated CUI
Official.
(2) For information not under the Departmental Element's cognizance, ensure
the challenge is submitted to the appropriate authority. Challenges for
Specified CUI are submitted under the requirements and authorities
established under the applicable LRGWP or DOE Directive.
(3) There must be a process within each Departmental Element to accept and
manage challenges to CUI status. The process must include referral of
challenges governed by LRGWP or a DOE Directive to the appropriate
authority. Challenges may be issued by anyone in DOE without fear of
reprisal or retribution, with the challenged information protected from
broad disclosure. Otherwise, the process must include a timely response to
the challenger that:
(a) Acknowledges receipt of the challenge;
(b) States an expected timetable for response to the challenger;
(c) Requires  the challenger to define a rationale for belief that the CUI
in question is inappropriately designated;
(d) Gives contact information for the official making the Departmental
Element’s decision in this matter;
(e) Ensures there is no retribution for challenges; and
(f) Until the challenge is resolved, ensures the challenged CUI is
safeguarded and disseminated at the control level indicated in the
markings.
If the challenged document or matter is not marked as CUI, it should be 
treated as CUI until the challenge is resolved. 
(4) Except as governed by the requirements and authorities under LRGWP, if
a challenger disagrees with the Departmental Element response, the

--- page 16 ---
16 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
ch
allenger may first appeal to the DOE CUI SAO. If the issue is still not 
resolved, then the challenger may use the Dispute Resolution procedures 
described in 32 CFR part 2002.  
k. Misuse.
(1) Misuse of CUI, in printed or electronic form, must be reported in
accordance with the requirements provided in this Directive to the
Departmental Element Designated CUI Official.
(2) Incidents of misuse are reported following security incident and/or
incident response timelines and procedures developed by the Departmental
Element.
(3) Any misuse of CUI Specified may be considered as an Incident of
Security Concern under DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Program,
current version.
(4) Incidents of misuse of CUI must be reported and investigated if the misuse
results in the information being released to unauthorized persons.
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.
a. Secretary of Energy (S1). Designates the DOE SAO for CUI.
b. DOE SAO for CUI.
(1) Designated in writing by the Secretary as the SAO for CUI responsible for
implementing the CUI Program. Serves as the primary point of contact for
official correspondence, accountability reporting, and other matters of
record between DOE and the CUI EA.
(2) Designates the CUI Program Manager.
(3) Establishes agency processes and criteria for reporting and investigating
misuse of CUI as defined in 32 CFR section 2002.4 and in accordance
with section 2002.54 to the CUI Program. These processes and criteria are
in addition to any other reporting or investigating obligations and
authorities, such as those established for the OIG.
(4) Establishes an authority which takes administrative action against misuse
of CUI.
(5) Approves DOE-wide CUI Training Program and consults with the
National Training Center (NTC) in the development of CUI Training
Program in accordance with the training requirements under 32 CFR part
2002.

--- page 17 ---
17 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(6) Except as governed by LRGWP, reviews Departmental Element-approved
exemptions and equivalencies to maintain visibility over exemptions and
equivalencies of all or some of the CUI marking and safeguarding
requirements while the CUI remains within DOE control.
(7) Ensures exemptions and equivalencies requested for CUI governed by
LRWGP are referred to the appropriate authority.
(8) Maintains final approval authority over all CUI exemptions and
equivalencies over CUI marking and safeguarding requirements while the
CUI remains within DOE control and coordinates exemptions and
equivalencies with NARA as necessary.
(9) Annually reviews and assesses DOE’s CUI Program to ensure program
effectiveness, measures the level of compliance, and monitors the progress
of CUI implementation across DOE. This will be conducted through an
annual self-inspection by selecting a group of Departmental Elements to
serve as a representative sample of the entire Department.
(10) Sets proper controls and countermeasures necessary to protect information
on Information Technology (IT) systems during processing, while in
storage, and during transmission, per FIPS 199 and NIST SP 800-53.
c. CUI Program Manager .
(1) Serves as the official representative to the CUI EA on DOE’s day-to-day
CUI Program operations, both within the DOE and in interagency
contexts.
(2) Has overall responsibility for managing CUI requests and concerns from
Departmental Elements.
(3) Serves as the CUI liaison between the Office of the Chief Information
Officer (OCIO) and the Departmental Elements.
d. Heads of Departmental Elements.
(1) Implement the CUI program, to include training, within their
Departmental Elements.
(2) Ensure oversight of CUI complies with DOE O 226.1, Implementation of
Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current version.
(3) Designate in writing a Departmental Element Designated CUI Official and
notifies the CUI SAO of the appointment and any changes.

--- page 18 ---
18 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(4
) Ensure Departmental Element processes that align with the requirements
listed in this Directive are in place for reporting and investigating misuse
of CUI.
(5) Ensure the requirements and responsibilities of this Directive are followed
by all their subordinate organizational levels.
(6) Identify additional requirements covering the sections listed above for any
CUI Specified Categories owned or managed by the Departmental
Element.
(7) Recommend additional supplemental administrative markings to the
Departmental Element's Designated CUI Official.
(8) Determine if element-specific training is required for their personnel as a
supplement to the DOE-wide CUI training program.
e. Departmental Element Designated CUI Official .
(1) Oversees the implementation of the requirements in this Directive within
their element in compliance with DOE O 226.1, Implementation of
Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current version.
(2) Determines the individual(s) responsible for approving and complying
with the single-step and multi-step destruction process.
(3) Except as governed by LRGWP, approves exemptions and equivalencies
of all or some of their Element’s CUI marking, safeguarding, and
destruction requirements while the CUI remains within DOE control and
reports approved exemptions and equivalencies to the SAO for CUI.
(4) Approves requests for additional approved methods of public release and
reports approved requests to the SAO for CUI.
(5) Collaborates with NTC on CUI Specified training requirements when
warranted for Departmental Element employees in accordance with this
Directive and ensures element employees receive appropriate NTC CUI
training.
(6) Develops and maintains a list of CUI Basic and Specified Categories most
applicable to the Departmental Element for persons within the element to
reference when identifying and marking CUI.
(7) Submits requests for new CUI Categories to the DOE SAO for CUI.
(8) Creates a process within their Departmental Element to accept and manage
challenges and reports of misuse, to include referral to appropriate
authorities under LRGWP.

--- page 19 ---
19 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
(9) Except as governed by LRGWP, determines alternate markings /
accountability in coordination with the cognizant office (when applicable)
when applying CUI marking is not feasible.
(10) May appoint internal program and contractor liaisons to support the
Departmental Element Designated CUI Official in addressing inquiries
and communicating CUI Program updates to Authorized Holders.
(11) Reviews requests for permanent burial as an option for permanent
placement of CUI materials, excluding records.
f. Authorized Holders.
(1) Safeguard CUI in all forms including written, verbal, and electronic in
accordance with the requirements of this Directive and the applicable
LRGWP as indicated in the CUI Registry.
(2) Challenge information they believe is improperly or incorrectly identified
as or is not identified as CUI, as appropriate.
(3) Report the misuse of CUI under their Departmental Element’s procedures,
in printed or electronic form.
(4) Complete CUI training required under this Directive and applicable
LRGWPs.
(5) Comply with 32 CFR part 2002 and applicable LRGWPs.
(6) Coordinate with the appropriate authorities as necessary.
g. National Training Center (NTC).
(1) Develop the training program in accordance with the training requirements
set forth in 32 CFR part 2002 and in consultation with the DOE SAO for
CUI.
(2) Maintain and update the training related to CUI, as necessary.
(3) Provide training to Departmental personnel.
(4) Assist in the development of the CUI Specified training.
6. INVOKED STANDARDS. The following DOE technical standards and industry
standards are invoked as required methods in this Order in accordance with the
applicability and conditions described within this Order. Any technical standard or
industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by this Order, but is not included in
the list below, is not invoked by this Order. Note: DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J provides a
definition for “invoked technical standard.”

--- page 20 ---
20 DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
a. NIST FIPS 140-3, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. This
standard requires the use of compliant encryption methods for the transmission of
CUI over the internet, including email transmission, fax transmission, printing,
copying, removable media, and storage on shared drives, and with collaboration
tools such as text messaging, video conferencing, and other productivity tools.
b. NIST FIPS 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information
and Information Systems. This standard is required to be used to ensure that CUI
is processed, stored, or transmitted on both federal information systems operated
by DOE and by a contractor on behalf of DOE at a confidentiality impact value
no lower than moderate.
c. NIST SP 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations. This standard is required to be used to set the proper controls
and countermeasures necessary to protect information on Information Technology
(IT) systems during processing, while in storage, and during transmission, as well
as ensuring the proper destruction of Electronic media.
d. NIST SP 800-88, Guidelines for Media Sanitization. This standard is required to
be used to ensure when reproducing CUI on equipment such as printers, copiers,
scanners, or fax machines, that the equipment does not retain the copied data or
CUI, and that the equipment is sanitized accordingly. Additionally, this standard
is required to be used when destroying electronic media containing CUI.
e. NIST SP 800-171, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
Systems and Organizations. This standard is required to be used in order to
protect CUI stored on non-federal information systems.
7. REFERENCES.
a. Executive Order (EO) 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information
b. Title 32 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), part 2002, Controlled Unclassified
Information
c. Title 10 CFR, part 1017, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled
Nuclear Information
d. H.R.624, Social Security Number Fraud Prevention Act of 2017
e. DOE Order (O) 205.1, Department of Energy Cybersecurity Program, current
version
f. DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version
g. DOE O 221.1, Reporting Fraud, Waste and Abuse to the Office of Inspector
General, current version

--- page 21 ---
21 (and 22) DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
h. DOE O 221.2, Cooperation with the Office of Inspector General , current version
i. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current
version
j. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version
k. DOE O 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information Management, current version
l. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version
m. DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Program, current version
n. DOE O 471.1, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear
Information, current version
o. DOE O 471.6, Information Security, current version
p. DOE O 475.2, Identifying Classified Information, current version
8. DEFINITIONS. Attachment 2 provides definitions.
9. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Directive should be directed to the Office of the
Chief Information Officer at (202) 586-0166.
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
DAVID M. TURK 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 22 ---


--- page 23 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 Page 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 1: CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 471.7, CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD and the applicable requirements in Executive Order (EO) 13556, 32 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) part 2002, and the CUI Registry. The contractor is 
responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the 
extent necessary to ensure the contractor’s compliance with the requirements.  
In addition to the requirements set forth in this CRD, contractors are responsible for complying 
with Attachment 2 to DOE O 471.7, referenced in and made a part of this CRD, which provides 
information applicable to contracts in which this CRD is inserted. 
1. Nothing in this CRD is intended to restrict the creation or dissemination of unclassified
scientific research, in alignment with the scientific missions of DOE, NSDD-189, the
OPEN Government Act of 2007 (Public Law No: 110-175) and the OPEN Government
Data Act (Title II of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (Public Law
115-435).
2. The Contractor must institute a Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program
consistent with Departmental Element and Site Office federal direction for the
appropriate identification, marking, safeguarding, dissemination, decontrolling, and
destruction of CUI. The Contractor’s CUI program must ensure that:
a. Applicability. CUI standards are applied to all federal unclassified information.
Only those categories approved by National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA), the CUI Executive Agent (EA), and published in the CUI Registry are
used to identify, mark, safeguard, disseminate, decontrol, and destroy CUI.
b. Identification. Federal unclassified information created or originated by the
contractor, produced by or for the contractor, or under the control of the
contractor, through a DOE contractual mechanism, that has been determined to be
CUI [per Departmental Element direction or law, regulation, or government-wide
policy (LRGWP)], is identified as containing CUI.
c. Marking. Documents and matter determined to contain CUI are marked
appropriately as defined in the CUI registry. Except for Unclassified Controlled
Nuclear Information (UCNI) and Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information (NNPI),
CUI markings are the only markings to be used to designate documents and
matter containing CUI.
d. Communication. The Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) is
notified when there are modifications to the CUI status of scientific and technical
information previously announced or submitted to OSTI, in accordance with DOE
O 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information Management, current version.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 1 
Page 1-2 
DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
e. Safeguarding.
(1) CUI may be processed, stored, or transmitted on both federal information
systems operated by DOE and by a contractor on behalf of DOE. Because
the confidentiality impact value for CUI is no lower than moderate in
accordance with federal Information Processing Standards Publication
199, systems containing CUI must ensure proper controls are implemented
according to National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Special Publication (SP) 800-53 in alignment with DOE Order (O) 205.1,
Department of Energy Cybersecurity Program, current version.
(2) CUI stored on non-federal information systems must follow the
requirements of NIST SP 800-171 in order to protect CUI, unless specific
requirements are specified by LRGWP for protecting the information.
(3) Program must establish controlled environments in which to protect CUI
from unauthorized access or disclosure and make use of those controlled
environments. A controlled environment is any area or space an
authorized holder deems to have adequate physical or procedural controls
(e.g., barriers or managed access controls) to protect CUI from
unauthorized access or disclosure. When outside a controlled environment,
ensure CUI is protected under authorized holder’s direct control, or with at
least one physical barrier, and reasonably ensure that the authorized holder
or the physical barrier protects the CUI from unauthorized access or
observation.
(4) Program must ensure that if an unmarked document and matter is believed
to contain CUI, the unmarked document and matter is protected as CUI
until it can be reviewed to determine if it contains CUI.
(5) CUI that is reproduced (e.g., copied, scanned, printed, electronically
duplicated) or shared must be protected the same as the original CUI
document and matter in furtherance of a Lawful Government Purpose
(LGP).
(6) When reproducing CUI on equipment such as printers, copiers, scanners,
or fax machines, ensure to the extent possible the equipment does not
retain the unencrypted copied data or CUI but may retain other unrelated
data, and that the equipment is sanitized. Consideration should be given to
a phased implementation of eventually requiring all equipment authorized
to hold CUI to meet this requirement.
f. CUI Training. Contractors interacting with CUI documents and matter shall
receive training approved by the Departmental Element Designated CUI Official
or delegate.
g. Access and Sharing. Access to documents and matter marked as containing CUI
or CUI from such documents and matter are provided only to those persons who

--- page 25 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 Page 1-3 
have a LGP. Additionally, access to CUI is restricted in accordance with 
applicable LRGWP. 
h. Dissemination. [Limits on how CUI is transmitted.]
(1) When sending CUI via email to accounts outside of Federal IT systems the
CUI must be in an attachment and protected by encryption or password
protection unless the authorized holder assesses that the immediate
mission and business needs outweigh any risk of sending the email
without encryption or password protection. In such situations, authorized
holders may be required by their supervisor to provide a written statement
regarding their determination. The password must be transmitted
separately from the email attachment containing CUI (e.g., by phone or
text).
(2) Legacy documents and matter that will retain Official Use Only (OUO)
markings or have not been reviewed to determine if they contain CUI,
should also be safeguarded in accordance with the requirements
established in this CRD. If safeguarding requirements cannot be met, the
Contactor must develop alternate plans for appropriately protecting
documents and matter that may potentially contain CUI. This alternate
protection plan must be approved by the Departmental Element
Designated CUI Official or delegate.
i. Decontrol.
(1) Documents and matter determined by the disseminating office to no longer
warrant protection as CUI shall have their markings removed. Decontrol
instructions are not required, but if known, may be indicated on the front
of the document.
(2) Transferring records to NARA .
(a) When feasible, records containing CUI must be decontrolled prior
to transferring to NARA.
(b) When records cannot be decontrolled before transferring to
NARA, it must be indicated on a Transfer Request (TR) in
NARA’s Electronic Records Archives (ERA) or on an SF 258
paper transfer form, that the records should continue to be
controlled as CUI (subject to NARA’s regulation on transfer,
public availability, and access: See 38 CFR parts 1235, 1250, and
1256).
(c) For hard copy transfer, do not place a CUI marking on the outside
of the container

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 1 
Page 1-4 
DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
j. Destruction . Destruction of CUI, including in electronic form, is accomplished in
a manner that makes it unreadable, indecipherable, and irrecoverable.
k. Equivalency and Exemption. Any request for an equivalency or exemption from
any requirements in the CRD for DOE O 471.7 must be provided to the
appropriate Departmental Element Designated CUI Official or designee. Such
requests must:
(1) Identify the requirement for which an equivalency or exemption is being
requested,
(2) Explain why the equivalency or exemption is needed, and
(3) If requesting an equivalency or exemption, describe the alternate or
equivalent means for meeting the protection requirements.
l. Misuse. Reports on certain types of CUI misuse, only if the misuse may result in
the document being released to unauthorized persons, are reported to the
Departmental Element and Site Office Designated CUI Officials as soon as is
practical, and to the OIG, as necessary pursuant to OIG reporting requirements.
The types of reportable misuse include:
(1) CUI from a document and matter marked as containing CUI is
intentionally released to a person who does not have a LGP requiring
access to the information to perform his or her job or other DOE-
authorized activities.
(2) A document and matter marked as containing CUI is intentionally or
negligently released to a person who does not have a LGP requiring access
to the information to perform his or her job or other DOE-authorized
activities.
(3) A document and matter that is known to contain CUI is intentionally not
marked.
(4) A document and matter that is known to not contain CUI is intentionally
marked as containing such information.
If the reports result in violations being confirmed, then the Contractor will self-
impose penalties, as appropriate. Moreover, the Departmental Element may make 
a determination on additional Contractor penalties.

--- page 27 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 Page 2-1 
ATTACHMENT 2: DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 471.7 as well 
as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 471.7) is inserted. 
1. Access. Granting permission to view and handle CUI, provided such access or
dissemination: (i) Abides by the laws, regulations, or Government-wide policies that
established the CUI category; (ii) Furthers a lawful Government purpose; (iii) Is not
restricted by an authorized limited dissemination control established by the CUI EA; and
(iv) Is not otherwise prohibited by law.
2. Authorized Holder. An individual, organization, or group of users that is permitted to
designate or handle CUI, consistent with the guidelines in this Directive, 32 CFR Part
2002, and the CUI Registry.
3. Control Level. A general term that indicates the safeguarding and disseminating
requirements associated with CUI Basic and CUI Specified.
4. Controlled Environment. Any area or space an authorized holder deems to have adequate
physical or procedural controls (e.g., barriers or managed access controls) to protect CUI
from unauthorized access or disclosure.
5. Controlled Unclassified Infor mation (CUI). CUI is information the Government creates
or possesses, or that an entity creates or possesses for or on behalf of the Government,
that a LRGWP requires or permits an agency to handle using safeguarding or
dissemination controls. CUI does not include classified information or information a non-
executive branch entity possesses and maintains in its own systems that did not come
from, or was not created or possessed by or for, an executive branch agency or an entity
acting for an agency.
6. CUI Basic. This is the subset of CUI for which the authorizing law, regulation, or
Government-wide policy does not set out specific handling or dissemination controls.
7. CUI Categories. Types of information for which a LRGWP requires or permits agencies
to exercise safeguarding or dissemination controls, and which the CUI EA has approved
and listed in the CUI Registry. The controls for any CUI Basic categories are the same,
but the controls for CUI Specified categories can differ from CUI Basic ones and from
each other. A CUI category may be CUI Specified, and vice versa. If dealing with CUI
that falls into a CUI Specified category, review the controls for that category on the CUI
Registry. Also consult the agency’s CUI policy for specific direction from the SAO for
CUI.
8. CUI Executive Agent (EA). The Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO) of the
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is designated as the U.S.
Government CUI EA for the executive branch and issues guidance to all Federal agencies
on safeguarding and marking CUI.

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 2 
Page 2-2 
DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 
9. CUI Specified. This is the subset of CUI in which the authorizing law, regulation, or
Government-wide policy contains specific handling controls that it requires or permits
agencies to use that differ from those for CUI Basic.
10. CUI Marking Handbook. A resource that provides additional guidance on CUI Marking
instructions. This handbook is publicly available on the CUI Registry.
11. CUI Registry. The online repository for all information, guidance, policy, and
requirements on handling CUI, including everything issued by the CUI EA other than this
Directive. Among other information, the CUI Registry identifies all approved CUI
categories, provides general descriptions for each, identifies the basis for controls,
establishes markings, and includes guidance on handling procedures. The CUI Registry
also indicates which LRGWP include any specific requirements for CUI Specified.
12. Decontrolling. An event that occurs when the disseminating office, consistent with this
Directive and the CUI Registry, removes safeguarding or dissemination controls from
CUI that no longer requires such controls. Decontrol may occur automatically or through
agency action.
13. Disseminating Office. The Office responsible for identifying and marking a document
and matter as CUI. 
14. Electronic Media. Consists of devices containing bit / bytes like hard drives, random
access memory, read only memory, disks, memory devices, etc.
15. Export Controlled Information. Information (which may include technology, technical
data, assistance or software), the export (including, as applicable, transfer to foreign
nationals within the United States) of which is controlled under the “Export
Administration Regulations” (maintained by the U.S. Department of Commerce), the
“International Traffic in Arms Regulations” (maintained by the U.S. Department of
State), “10 CFR Part 810, Assistance to Foreign Atomic Energy Activities” regulations
(maintained by the U.S. Department of Energy), or various trade and economic sanctions
(maintained by the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control).
16. Handling CUI. Any use of CUI, including but not limited to identifying, marking,
safeguarding, transporting, disseminating, re-using, and disposing of the information.
17. Hard Copy Media. Physical representations of information such as paper, faxes, ribbons,
drums, etc. 
18. Lawful Government Purpose (LGP). Lawful Government Purpose, as defined by the CUI
Registry, is any activity, mission, function, operation, or endeavor that the U.S.
Government authorizes or recognizes within the scope of its legal authorities or the legal
authorities of non-executive branch entities (such as state and local law enforcement). An
employee's LGP may be defined by DOE policy, position descriptions, or contractual
requirements.

--- page 29 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 471.7 
2-3-2022 Page 2-3 (and 2-4) 
19. Law, Regulation, or Government- wide Policy (LRGWP). The basis for safeguarding or
dissemination controls under 32 CFR part 2002. 
20. Legacy Material. Unclassified information (e.g., OUO) that is marked as restricted from
access or dissemination in some way, or otherwise controlled, prior to the CUI Program.
21. Limited Dissemination Control. Is any CUI EA-approved control that agencies may use
to limit or specify CUI dissemination. (e.g., Dissemination List Controlled (DL Only)).
22. Misuse of CUI. Results in the release of a document and matter containing CUI to
unauthorized persons.
23. Scientific and Technical Information (STI). Information products deemed by the
originator to be useful beyond the originating site (i.e., intended to be published or
disseminated), in any format or medium, which contain findings and technological
innovations resulting from research and development (R&D) efforts and scientific and
technological work of scientists, researchers, and engineers, whether Federal employee,
contractor, or financial assistance recipient. STI also conveys the results of demonstration
and commercial application activities as well as experiments, observations, simulations,
studies, and analyses. Scientific findings are communicated through various media – e.g.,
textual, multimedia, audiovisual, and digital – and are produced in a range of products
such as technical reports, scientific/technical conference papers and presentations, theses
and dissertations, scientific and technical computer software, journal articles, workshop
reports, program documents and matter, patents, publicly available scientific research
datasets, or other forms of STI. STI may be classified, Unclassified Controlled Nuclear
Information (UCNI), controlled unclassified information (CUI), or unclassified with no
access restrictions. DOE-funded STI originates primarily from research and other
activities performed by site/facility management contractors, direct DOE-executed prime
procurements, DOE-operated research activities, and financial assistance recipients, in
addition to DOE employees.
