 
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of General Counsel 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER  
 Washington, D.C. 
 
Approved: 12-20-2016 
Chg 1 (MinChg): 02-08-2019 
Chg 2 (LtdChg): 12-13-2019 
Chg 3 (MinChg): 10-28-2024 
 
SUBJECT: DOE COOPERATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
1. PURPOSE.  
a. To establish Department of Energy (DOE) policy, requirements, and 
responsibilities for the oversight, management, and administration of Cooperative 
Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) activities at DOE facilities. 
b. To provide practical guidelines that will expedite the CRADA process. 
c. To make certain through the use of CRADAs, consistent with the terms of the 
DOE Facility Contract or delegation of authority, DOE and its facilities will— 
(1) facilitate the efficient and expeditious development, transfer, and 
exploitation of Federally owned or originated technology to non-DOE 
entities for the public benefit and to enhance the accomplishment of 
DOE missions; 
(2) leverage DOE resources, through its programs and facilities, through 
partnering; and 
(3) ensure fairness of opportunity, protect the national security, promote the 
economic interests of the United States, and provide a variety of means 
to respond to private-sector concerns and interests about facility 
technology partnering activities. 
d. To ensure that DOE and its facilities— 
(1) carry out CRADA activities in accordance with applicable laws and 
authorities; and 
(2) ensure consistent development and application of policy and procedures 
in planning and conducting CRADA activities at DOE facilities; and 
ensure the availability of timely and accurate CRADA data and 
information to monitor, evaluate, and describe DOE CRADA activities. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES. DOE O 483.1B, DOE Cooperative Research and 
Development Agreements, dated 12-20-16. Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, 
modify or otherwise affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the 
directive. Contractor Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into 
a contract remain in effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the  
DOE O 483.1B 
2 DOE O 483.1B 
 12-20-2016 
 
 
contract or regulatory commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are 
no longer applicable or substitute a new set of requirements.  
3. APPLICABILITY.  
a. Departmental Applicability.  
(1) Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c., the provisions 
of this Order apply to all Departmental organizational elements 
negotiating and entering into CRADAs performed under Title 15 United 
States Code (U.S.C.), Section 3710a. Government- Owned, Contractor-
Operated (GOCO) facility contractors, also referred to as Management and 
Operating (M&O) contractors are authorized to enter into CRADAs by 
inclusion of the Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) 
970.5227-3, Technology Transfer Mission clause. Government-Owned, 
Government-Operated (GOGO) facilities are authorized to enter into 
CRADAs by delegation of authority.  
(2) The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) must assure that NNSA employees comply with their 
responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this directive will be 
construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under 
section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary.  
b. DOE Contractors. Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c., the 
Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), Attachment 1, sets forth 
requirements of this Order that apply to contracts that include the CRD. The CRD 
must be included in all DOE facility contracts under which contractors negotiate 
and enter into CRADAs under the National Competitiveness Technology Transfer 
Act of 1989. 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 483.1B. Equivalencies and Exemptions to 
this Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1D, Departmental 
Directives Program, and its successors. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. The following policies and requirements must be applied in carrying 
out the CRADA program. 
a. The proposed work is expected to result in a benefit consistent with the program 
missions at the facility and the facility’s mission as established by the cognizant 
secretarial officer (CSO). 
b. The proposed work represents a collaboration with one or more non-Federal 
parties in specified research or development efforts that is consistent with the 
missions of the facility or facilities (in multi-laboratory CRADA activities). The 
non-Federal party contribution must be more than financial and/or equipment or 
the development of a statement of work, that is, the non-federal party must 
DOE O 483.1B 3 
12-20-2016 
 
 
collaborate. One hundred percent (100%) funds-in CRADA are permissible and 
may be entered into by DOE Facilities, as long as there is collaboration, and the 
DOE Facility Contractor informs the non-Federal party of the availability of 
alternate forms of technology partnering mechanisms in accordance with the 
Contractor’s contract with DOE. Any questions regarding the various 
collaboration requirements described in this Order should be directed to the 
Assistant General Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property who 
will consult with the appropriate DOE program offices. 
c. In conducting its CRADA activities, the facility must prepare procedures and take 
all reasonable measures to ensure widespread notice of availability of 
technologies suited for transfer and for opportunities for exclusive licensing and 
joint research arrangements. 
d. Activities must be conducted in a manner that does not compromise the national 
security, economic, or environmental interests of the United States. 
e. Export control reviews must be performed in accordance with facility contracts 
and DOE policy. CRADA activities can result in information and technologies 
that may be subject to export controls. This export-controlled information (ECI) 
may or may not also fall under such categories as Classified information or 
Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information (UCNI). The information and/or 
technology may become ECI at any stage. Information and data that are 
commercially valuable may be developed, including some that may have 
intellectual property rights associated with it. Consistent with applicable statutes, 
such information may be considered for protection from public dissemination, for 
a period not to exceed 5 years after development of information, to retain its 
commercial value and provide an incentive for its commercial application. Any 
protectable information generated or exchanged as a result of this CRADA will be 
marked, handled, and safeguarded in accordance with all applicable federal laws, 
rules, regulations and DOE Orders or directives, including but not limited to, the 
Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. §1905), the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 
U.S.C. §552), DOE’s implementing FOIA regulations at 10 C.F.R. Part 1004, the 
Federal Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. §3710a(c)), and DOE Order 471.3, 
Admin Chg. 1, Identifying and protecting Official Use Only Information. In 
accordance with these rules, certain information transmitted pursuant to a 
CRADA may qualify for protecting from disclosure under FOIA. 
f. DOE employees, in accordance with applicable law and the provisions of facility 
contracts, must protect properly marked proprietary information and data 
provided by private-sector collaborators and non-Federal parties in the conduct of 
CRADA activities. 
g. Non-Federal parties (also referred to as "Participants") are permitted to use funds 
previously obtained from federal sources as its contribution to fund a project, 
provided such use is consistent with the underlying Funding Agreement. 
4 DOE O 483.1B 
 12-20-2016 
 
 
However, when Federal funds are being used by a non-Federal party, special 
considerations must be taken into account, including: 
(1) whether the non-Federal party’s previous award contains authority for 
special data protection that justifies enhanced protection of information 
generated under the CRADA (i.e. protection of Protected CRADA 
Information) or in the alternative, limits data protection to a period of 
protection less than that provided under 15 U.S.C. § 3710a; 
(2) any potential inconsistencies in the U.S. Competitiveness clauses 
between the non-Federal party’s award and the DOE Model CRADA 
language; 
(3) in case of inconsistencies between the non-Federal party’s award and the 
CRADA, include a statement that indicates which agreement controls or 
ensure that such inconsistencies are addressed during negotiations; and 
(4) whether the non-Federal party has clear election rights to inventions 
made under its previous award. 
h. Master Scope of Work Process: Consistent with current DOE/NNSA policy 
requirements, the cognizant Contracting Officer may approve a Master Scope of 
Work (MSW) for routine work with non-Federal parties, i.e., Participants.1  If the 
DOE Facility Contractor and the Contracting Officer agree upon an MSW, 
individual project transactional approval by the Contracting Officer is not 
required if the DOE Facility Contractor determines that the proposed transaction 
falls within the approved MSW.  Rather, the DOE Facility Contractor applies the 
Contracting Officer’s MSW written certification and approval to the transaction.  
The DOE Facility Contractor must provide to the Contracting Officer a written 
determination of its decision that the project falls within the MSW, subject to 
Contracting Officer review and oversight.  The Contracting Officer is still 
responsible for placing the work and funding onto the contract as required for all 
work at the facility using standard contracting procedures and consistent with the 
DOE Chief Financial Officer’s (CFO) guidance.  Any proposed work that has 
specific requirements, e.g., a foreign engagement (DOE Policy 485.1, Foreign 
Engagements with DOE National Laboratories, current version) or work 
involving animal subjects, must receive the necessary approvals for such 
requirements before the proposed work can enter or re-enter the MSW process.  
 
1 The first negotiated MSW at each site shall be approved by the Headquarters Office of the Cognizant Secretarial 
Officer.  All MSWs must reflect the current mission priorities of such Headquarters Office.  If implemented, each 
site should consider making its first MSW relatively narrow in scope recognizing that MSWs are expected to evolve 
over time, either broadening or narrowing, depending on contractor performance and other relevant factors such as 
potential impact on DOE/NNSA mission work.    
DOE O 483.1B 5 
12-20-2016 
 
 
The MSW process must never be authorized or utilized for any type of classified 
or other work requiring classification guidance.    
i. The current Science and Technology (S&T) Risk Matrix, maintained by the DOE 
Federal Oversight and Advisory Body (FOAB), must be reviewed for each 
proposed engagement with a foreign entity, as defined in DOE P 485.1, from a 
Country of Risk to determine if the engagement is in an area identified as 
restricted in the S&T Matrix. 
j. Project exemption requests for CRADAs with foreign entities from Countries of 
Risk in areas identified as restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix must be 
submitted through the FOAB for approval by the cognizant Under Secretary or 
his/her designee.  Exemptions must be approved by the cognizant Under Secretary 
or his/her designee prior to initiating a review of these foreign-sponsored 
CRADAs under DOE P 485.1 (see paragraph 4.h. of this Order). 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Under Secretary of Energy, Under Secretary for Science, or their designees, in 
consultation with the Under Secretary for Nuclear Security, or his/her designee, as 
appropriate. 
(1) Recommend, establish and coordinate policy and provide overall 
guidance, subject to the Secretary’s direction, for CRADA activities, and 
recommend appropriate delegations of authority for carrying out such 
policy and guidance. 
(2) Serve as the focal point and provide leadership for developing policies 
and procedures, resolving CRADA partnering issues, and ensuring 
effective implementation of existing policies. 
(3) Approve/disapprove exemption requests based on the current S&T Risk 
Matrix and FOAB recommendations. 
b. The Technology Transfer Coordinator, in consultation with the Technology 
Transfer Policy Board. 
(1) Develops policy and recommends procedures for the conduct, and is 
responsible for the coordination, of CRADA activities at DOE facilities. 
(2) Provides an interagency coordination point for CRADA activities at 
DOE facilities, as appropriate. 
(3) Provides guidance to Cognizant Secretarial Officers (CSO) for the 
preparation and submission of reports, such as the annual DOE Report to 
Congress on technology partnering program activities. 
6 DOE O 483.1B 
 12-20-2016 
 
 
(4) Coordinates the preparation of annual facility technology partnering 
program reports. 
(5) Coordinates and conducts training, in coordination with the Head of 
Field Element, of DOE field personnel responsible for oversight of the 
Contractors’ technology transfer programs to ensure consistent 
development and application of policy and procedures in planning and 
conducting CRADA activities at DOE facilities. 
c. Cognizant Secretarial Officers (CSO). 
(1) Exercise primary oversight, management, and administrative 
responsibility for CRADA activities at facilities under their cognizance. 
(2) For facilities under their cognizance, provide general guidance in 
accordance with the terms of the facility contract or delegation of 
authority. 
(3) Ensure the availability of timely and accurate data and information about 
CRADAs from facilities under their cognizance for satisfying DOE 
reporting and information requirement. 
(4) Ensure that Heads of Field Element complete an appraisal of the 
performance of the CRADA activities under its cognizance on an 
established periodicity. 
(5) Reviews and concurs on exemption requests for CRADA projects with 
foreign entities from Countries of Risk that are in areas identified as 
restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix, prior to FOAB review of the 
exemption request. 
d. Program Secretarial Officers (PSO). 
(1) Exercise primary programmatic responsibility for the implementation of 
CRADA activities for their programs. 
(2) Support the CSO in the execution of the CSO’s institutional 
responsibilities, by providing programmatic, mission area, and technical 
expertise in the resolution of CRADA issues. 
(3) Reviews and concurs on exemption requests for CRADA projects with 
foreign entities from Countries of Risk which are in areas identified as 
restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix, prior to FOAB review of the 
exemption request. 
  
DOE O 483.1B 7 
12-20-2016 
 
 
e. Assistant General Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property. 
(1) Provides legal counsel to Departmental elements on all matters relating 
to intellectual property (including patents, copyrights, and technical 
data) and transfer of those rights to the private sector in accordance with 
established legal authorities, including from Department laboratories, 
and provides legal counsel on issues related to the CRADA program 
including questions regarding the various requirements presented in this 
Order. 
(2) Establishes policy on intellectual property rights, advises and provides 
guidance on intellectual property provisions for CRADAs, and approves 
waivers of patent rights and of any disposition of other intellectual 
property rights. 
f. Heads of DOE Field Elements. 
(1) Oversee CRADA activities conducted in DOE facilities under their 
purview. In this capacity, Heads of Field Elements are accountable to the 
CSO. 
(2) Ensure that federal staff and the Contractors under their purview 
effectively carry out appropriate CRADA activities in accordance with 
applicable laws, regulations, Departmental directives and delegations of 
authority. 
(3) Develop and implement local procedures for the review and approval of 
CRADA activities consistent with legislation, Departmental directives, 
and contractual commitments and objectives. 
(4) In coordination with the CSO and PSOs, conduct reviews and appraisals 
of CRADA activities under their cognizance. 
(5) Notify appropriate Headquarters elements in accordance with the 
notification criteria in Attachment 9 of this Order and guidance from the 
CSO. 
(6) Ensure adequate Contractor review and appropriate DOE engagement in 
proposed CRADA activities involving human and/or animal subjects for 
compliance with the established regulations and Departmental directives 
for protection of these subjects, as appropriate. 
(7) Ensure that CRADA activities under their purview are effectively 
conducted in accordance with applicable security, safeguards, and 
classification and controlled unclassified information policies, as 
appropriate. 
8 DOE O 483.1B 
 12-20-2016 
 
 
(8) Ensure the Contractor appropriately notifies the Office of Intelligence 
and Counterintelligence of any CRADA agreements involving 
intelligence activities 
(9) Ensure adequate DOE and Contractor review of CRADA activities for 
compliance with applicable environmental, safety, and health 
requirements, including requirements of the National Environmental 
Protection Act, as appropriate, and to determine the applicability of 10 
CFR Part 851 (Worker Safety and Health Program) to CRADA 
activities. 
(10) Consistent with the policies and procedures of the Department regarding 
CRADA activities, establish performance goals and measures to assess 
performance and effectiveness of local CRADA processes and impacts 
of subsequent improvements and/or additional requirements. 
(11) Ensure periodic review and appraisal of CRADA activities.  
(12) Ensure that summary information is maintained sufficient to respond to 
reporting requirements and to respond to requests for information from 
DOE Headquarters or outside entities. 
(13) Notify cognizant Contracting Officers of those contracts that must 
include the Contractor Requirements Document. 
(14) In coordination with the cognizant contractor, determines if a proposed 
CRADA project with a foreign entity from a Country of Risk is in an 
area identified as restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix and as 
appropriate, prepares exemption requests through the CSO, PSO, and 
FOAB for cognizant Under Secretarial approval.   
g. DOE Federal Oversight Advisory Body (FOAB).   
(1) Establishes and maintains procedural requirements for cognizant Under 
Secretary or designee approval of exemption requests for CRADA 
projects with foreign entities from Countries of Risk that are in areas 
identified as restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix. 
(2) Provide recommendations on all exemption requests for CRADA 
projects with foreign entities from Countries of Risk that are in areas 
identified as restricted in the current S&T Risk Matrix to the cognizant 
Under Secretary.  
(3) Reviews and maintains the S&T Risk Matrix.  
  
DOE O 483.1B 9 
12-20-2016 
 
 
h. Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence. 
(1) Establishes procedures for the review of all CRADA activities 
concerning intelligence and intelligence-related programs. 
(2) Approves all CRADA activities for intelligence-related programs. 
(3) Establishes procedures for the review of CRADA activities involving 
classified and/or controlled unclassified technology. The list of sensitive 
subjects is maintained by the Office of Defense Nuclear 
Nonproliferation. 
(4) Establishes procedures for the review CRADA activities involving 
foreign Participants. 
i. Contracting Officers. Once notified, incorporate the CRD into the affected 
contracts. 
6. REFERENCES. 
a. Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980, Public Law 96-480 (15 
U.S.C. 3701 et seq.), established Offices of Research and Technology 
Applications (ORTAs) at federal laboratories. 
b. Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, Public Law 96-517 (35 U.S.C. 200 et seq.), gives small 
businesses and nonprofit contractors the right to elect title to inventions made 
under funding agreements, with the Government retaining a license; provides for 
march-in rights and U.S. preference; and contains provisions relating to licensing 
of inventions. 
c. Section 152 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, Public Law 83-703 (42 U.S.C. 
2182), addresses the disposition of title to inventions useful in the production or 
utilization of special nuclear material or atomic energy made under DOE 
contracts, etc., and the process for waiving title to such inventions to contractors. 
d. Section 9 of the Federal Nonnuclear Energy Research and Development Act of 
1974, Public Law 93-577 (42 U.S.C. 5908), addresses the disposition of title to 
nonnuclear inventions made under DOE contracts, etc., and the process for 
waiving title to such inventions to contractors. 
e. Executive Order 12591, dated April 10, 1987, "Facilitating Access to Science and 
Technology," requires that Executive departments and agencies, to the extent 
permitted by law, transfer Federally funded technology to the commercial sector 
and specifically addresses GOGOs entering into CRADAs and licensing, 
assigning, and waiving intellectual property developed under such CRADAs. 
f. Section 31 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, Public Law 83-703 (42 U.S.C. 
2051), provides for the dissemination of scientific and technical information. 
10 DOE O 483.1B 
 12-20-2016 
 
 
g. Freedom of Information Act, Public Law 89-487 (5 U.S.C. 552 et seq.), provides 
for public access to Federal agency records, which would include records 
containing scientific and technical information created with Federal funding. 
h. Trademark Clarification Act of 1984, Public Law 98-620, extended the 
contractors’ right to elect title to inventions provided by the Bayh-Dole Act to 
DOE’s GOCO Contractors. 
i. Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986, Public Law 99-502, authorizes 
CRADAs for GOGOs, establishes the Federal Laboratory Consortium for 
Technology Transfer, and allows GOGO laboratories to negotiate licensing 
agreements for inventions made at its laboratories. 
j. National Competitiveness Technology Transfer Act of 1989, Public Law 101-189, 
establishes technology transfer as a laboratory mission and permits GOCOs to 
enter into CRADAs. 
k. National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995, Public Law 104-
113, provides the CRADA collaborating party an option for reasonable 
compensation when appropriate to choose an exclusive license for a pre- 
negotiated field of use in any invention made in whole or in part by a laboratory 
employee under the CRADA. 
l. National Defense Authorization Act of 1999, Public Law 105-261, provides for 
the Secretary of Energy to impose a Federal Administrative Charge (which 
includes any depreciation and imputed interest charges) in an amount not to 
exceed 3 percent of the full cost incurred in carrying out the research and 
activities on behalf of non-Departmental persons and entities. 
m. Technology Transfer Commercialization Act of 2000, Public Law 106-404, 
directs the Secretary of Energy to require the Contractors to appoint a technology 
partnership ombudsman to hear and help resolve complaints from outside 
organizations regarding the policies and actions of the laboratory with respect to 
technology partnerships. 
n. Title X Section 1001 of Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT 2005) (Public Law 
109-58) calls for the appointment of the Technology Transfer Coordinator to 
serve as the principal advisor to the Secretary of Energy on all matters relating to 
the technology transfer and commercialization. EPACT 2005 also stipulates that 
the Secretary shall establish a Technology Transfer Working Group to coordinate 
technology transfer activities occurring at the National Laboratories and single-
purpose research facilities. 
o. On February 28, 2011, the Secretary of Energy signed a Secretarial Policy 
Statement on Technology Transfer at DOE facilities. The Policy Statement is 
designed to help guide and strengthen DOE’s technology transfer efforts and to 
heighten awareness of the importance of technology transfer activities throughout 
DOE. DOE may issue updated Policy Statements from time to time. 
DOE O 483.1B 11 
12-20-2016 
 
 
p. Section 3196(a) of the Floyd D. Spence National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2001, Public Law 106-398, streamlines the approval process for 
CRADAs at GOCO facilities by authorizing federal agencies to substitute an 
annual strategic plan for individual joint work statements. 
q. Presidential Memorandum—Accelerating Technology Transfer and 
Commercialization of Federal Research in Support of High-Growth Businesses, 
Oct 28, 2011. 
r. Section 3120 of National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013, 
directing the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of NNSA, to the extent 
practicable, to streamline the approval process for Cooperative Research and 
Development Agreements. 
s. DOE O 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information Management, current version, 
provides requirements and responsibilities for the appropriate management and 
reporting of scientific and technical information. 
t. DOE O 471.3, Identifying and Protecting Official Use Only Information, current 
version, and DOE M 471.3-1, Manual for Identifying and Protecting Official Use 
Only Information, current version, establish requirements for DOE program to 
identify, mark, and protect documents containing such information. 
u. 10 CFR Part 1045, Nuclear Classification and Declassification - establishes the 
Government-wide policies and procedures for implementing sections 141 and 142 
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 for classifying and declassifying RD (restricted 
data) and FRD (formally restricted data) and implements those requirements of 
Executive Order 13526 concerning NSI that affect the public. 
v. Executive Order 13526, Classified National Security Information prescribes the 
Government-wide system for classifying, safeguarding, and declassifying NSI. 
w. DOE O 475.2, Identifying Classified Information, current version, establishes 
requirements for managing the DOE program including details for classifying and 
declassifying information, documents, and material classified under the Atomic 
Energy Act [Restricted Data, Formerly Restricted Data, and Transclassified 
Foreign Nuclear Information] or Executive Order 13526 [National Security 
Information], so that it can be protected against unauthorized dissemination. 
x. 10 CFR Part 1017, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled 
Nuclear Information--establishes Government-wide policies and procedures for 
implementing the requirements of section 148 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 
concerning the identification and protection of certain unclassified but sensitive 
Government information concerning atomic energy defense programs. 
y. DOE O 471.1, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear 
Information, current version, establishes requirements for managing the DOE 
program for identifying and protecting UCNI. 
12 DOE O 483.1B 
12-20-2016
7. DEFINITIONS.
a. Amendment. A change to a DOE-approved Joint Work Statement (JWS)/CRADA
document. 
b. Cognizant Secretarial Officer. Headquarters Assistant Secretaries, Deputy 
Administrators, and Directors responsible for oversight or institutional 
management of DOE/NNSA facilities.
c. Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA). Any agreement 
between one or more Federal facilities and one or more non- Federal parties under 
which the Government, through its facilities, provides personnel, services, 
facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or other resources with or without 
reimbursement (but not funds to non-Federal parties) and the non-Federal parties 
provide funds, personnel, services, facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or 
other resources toward the conduct of specified research or development efforts 
which are consistent with the mission of the facility; except that such terms do not 
include a procurement contract or cooperative agreement.
d. DOE Facility. Government-owned laboratory or production facility or other 
facility operated under DOE program cognizance.
e. DOE Facility Contractor. Entity that operates and maintains a DOE facility under 
contract with, and for the benefit of, DOE and has the responsibility and authority 
to conduct technology partnering activities.
f. DOE Federal Oversight Advisory Body (FOAB). A DOE group established to 
identify and implement policy changes to address the risk associated with 
international research collaboration and foreign national access to the DOE 
scientific enterprise.  The FOAB is responsible for reviewing and maintaining the 
Science and Technology Risk Matrix, processing exemption requests for instances 
where research collaboration is restricted, and providing feedback on 
Departmental science and technology engagement policies.
g. Foreign Country of Risk. Any foreign country determined to be of risk by the 
Office of Science in consultation with the Under Secretary for Science; the Under 
Secretary of Energy; the Under Secretary for Nuclear Security; and the Office of 
Intelligence and Counterintelligence. Referred to as Country or Countries of Risk 
throughout this Order.
h. Funds-In. Monies provided by a Participant(s) to a DOE Contractor for a CRADA
project. 
i. Heads of Field Elements. Federal managers of field elements and directors of
GOGOs. Heads of Field Elements that have line accountability for all site
program/project execution and contract management. Field element can refer to
operations office, integrated support center, field office or site office.
DOE O 483.1B 13 
12-20-2016
j. In-Kind Contributions. Noncash contributions provided by the Participant or
contractor. In-kind contributions must include collaboration in the research and
development efforts of the CRADA and may also include personnel, services,
facilities, equipment, intellectual property and other resources. Work may be
performed at either party’s facilities and include services that are directly
beneficial, specifically identifiable, and necessary for performance of the project.
In-kind contributions generally do not include work performed prior to execution
of the CRADA.
k. Joint Work Statement. A proposal prepared for a Federal agency by the director of
a Government-Owned, Contractor-Operated (GOCO) facility (or his/her delegate)
describing the purpose, scope, schedule, and estimated cost of a proposed
CRADA; assigning responsibilities among the agency, Contractor, and any other
party or parties to the proposed agreement; and, to the extent known, describing
the allocation of rights among the various parties.
l. Licensing. The transfer of less than ownership rights in intellectual property, such
as a patent or a software copyright, to permit its use by the licensee.
m. Master Scope of Work. A detailed description of a routine scope of work
(encompassing one or more projects) containing information sufficient to: (1)
ensure that the DOE Facility Contractor and the Contracting Officer have a
common understanding of the work to be performed; and (2) allow DOE to make
all reviews, approvals, determinations, and certifications required pursuant to this
Order and other relevant DOE policy.
n. Program Secretarial Officer (PSO). Headquarters Assistant Secretaries, Deputy
Administrators, and Directors who have management responsibility for program
planning, budgeting, and execution of DOE/NNSA mission program activities.
For purposes of this Order, the PSO funds work at a particular site or laboratory
via a "customer" relationship with the field element.
o. Technology Transfer Coordinator. Principal advisor to the Secretary on all
matters relating to technology transfer and commercialization. This office was
created under Title X, Section 1001 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005.
p. Technology Transfer Policy Board. Board consisting of representatives of DOE
Program Offices, the Office of General Counsel, and other parts of DOE that, in
consultation with the Technology Transfer Coordinator, develop DOE policy on
technology transfer.
14 DOE O 483.1B 
12-20-2016
8. CONTACT. For information about this Order, contact the Office of the Assistant General
Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property at 202-586- 2802.
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 DAVID M. TURK  
 Secretary of Energy 

DOE O 483.1B Attachment 1 
12-20-2016 Page 1-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 483.1B Chg 3, DOE COOPERATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
AGREEMENTS 
 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the Contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD). The contractor is responsible 
for flowing down the requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent 
necessary to ensure the contractor’s compliance with the requirements. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this CRD, contractors are responsible for complying 
with Attachments 2-9 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3 referenced in and made a part of this CRD and 
which provide program requirements and/or information applicable to contracts in which this 
CRD is inserted. 
Contractors must: 
1. Establish and maintain a management system, including policy and procedures that 
ensures Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) activities 
requirements are satisfied. 
2. Develop in conjunction with the Heads of Field Elements appropriate performance 
measures for CRADA activities and support DOE’s oversight and conduct of appraisals. 
3. If the Contractor is using an approved Master Scope of Work (MSW), the Contractor 
may apply the DOE Contracting Officer’s approval of the MSW to CRADAs and Joint 
Work Statements (JWSs), provided that the requirements of paragraph 4.h. of DOE Order 
483.1B Chg 1 and such approved MSW are met and DOE-approved CRADA terms and 
conditions are used.   
4. If the Contractor is not using an approved MSW, the Contractor must submit to the DOE 
Contracting Officer, CRADAs and JWSs for review and approval, or in the alternative, 
appropriate certification for a request for a preliminary determination to work at the 
Contractor’s own risk (the process for which is described in Attachment 2). 
5. Ensure proposed work involving human and/or animal subjects are in compliance with 
established regulations as well as coordinated in accordance with program and 
contractual requirements for protection of these subjects. 
6. Ensure projects are in compliance with DOE environmental, safety, and health 
requirements, including the National Environmental Protection Act, and 10 CFR Part 851 
(Worker Safety and Health Program), if applicable. 
7. Ensure projects are protected in accordance with applicable security, safeguards, and 
classification and controlled unclassified information policies and procedures, including 
the site security plan or supplemental security plan specific to a project, as well as CRDs 
for other Departmental directives governing the identification and protection of classified 
and controlled unclassified information. 
Attachment 1  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 1-2 12-20-2016 
 
 
8. Ensure contractor employees protect proprietary information and data provided by private 
sector collaborators and Participants in the conduct of CRADA activities as well as any 
generated data marked in accordance with the CRADA provisions. Any protectable data 
generated or exchanged as a result of this CRADA will be marked, handled, and 
safeguarded in accordance with all applicable federal laws, rules, regulations and DOE 
Orders or directives, including but not limited to, the Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. 
§1905), the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 U.S.C. §552), DOE’s implementing 
FOIA regulations at 10 C.F.R. Part 1004, the Federal Technology Transfer Act (15 
U.S.C. §3710a(c)), and DOE Order 471.3, Identifying and protecting Official Use Only 
Information. 
9. Request DOE approval for construction when that construction cost estimate exceeds the 
general plant project threshold. Approval by the cognizant Secretarial Officer and the 
Chief Financial Officer is required prior to initiation of work which exceeds the 
threshold. 
10. Maintain a project summary listing of information on each active CRADA project. 
11. Maintain project file information documenting policy compliance. 
12. Provide a final technical report, appropriately marked, to DOE’s Office of Scientific and 
Technical Information, at the completion or termination of the CRADA. 
13. Submit information on CRADAs as part of the annual Federal Laboratory technology 
transfer report. 
14. For CRADAs involving foreign participation, consult with the United States Trade 
Representative (USTR) as contractually required. 
15. Non-Federal parties (also referred to as "Participants") are permitted to use funds 
previously obtained from federal sources to finance a project. However, when Federal 
funds are being used by a non-Federal party, such use must be consistent with the 
underlying Funding Agreement and special considerations must be taken into account 
including: 
a. whether the non-Federal party’s previous award contains authority for special data 
protection that justifies enhanced protection of information generated under the 
CRADA (i.e. protection of Protected CRADA Information) or in the alternative, 
limits data protection to a period of protection less than that provided under 15 
U.S.C. § 3710a; 
b. any potential inconsistencies in the U.S. Competitiveness clauses between the 
non-Federal party’s award and the DOE Model CRADA language; 
c. in case of inconsistencies between the non-Federal party’s award and the 
CRADA, include a statement that indicates which agreement controls or ensure 
that such inconsistencies are addressed during negotiations; and
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 1 
12-10-2016 Page 1-3 (and Page 1-4) 
 
 
d. whether the non-Federal party has clear election rights to inventions made under 
its previous award. 
16. Review, in coordination with the Head of the Field Element, the current Science and 
Technology (S&T) Risk Matrix for each proposed foreign CRADA project with a foreign 
entity from a Country of Risk, to determine if that project is in an area identified as 
restricted, and, as appropriate, prepare exemption requests through the CSO, PSO, and 
FOAB for cognizant Under Secretarial approval. 
 

DOE O 483.1B Attachment 2 
12-10-2016 Page 2-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted.  The process described in this Attachment and 
the MSW process established in paragraph 4.h. of this Order are different processes for securing 
DOE Contracting Officer approval of a CRADA and JWS. 
JWS/CRADA PROCESS 
Procedures for review and approval of Contractor CRADAs are developed and implemented 
by the DOE field elements. The JWS is intended to be the primary tool for ensuring that the 
Contractor and DOE have a common understanding of the purpose, scope, schedule, and 
cost of work for a CRADA. DOE’s approval of a JWS sets the parameters within which the 
contractor may negotiate the CRADA. A JWS may be approved before the corresponding 
CRADA is approved by DOE. Alternatively, a Contractor may submit the JWS and the 
corresponding CRADA together for approval simultaneously. 
The DOE field element Contracting Officer will review the JWS for compliance with 
Federal and agency regulations and guidelines and approve the JWS pursuant to DOE 
policy. The DOE field element Contracting Officer may require concurrence from program 
managers, financial officer, legal and other reviewers pursuant to field office procedures. All 
issues and problems will be identified and resolved prior to approval. Attachment 6 (Joint 
Work Statement Format), presents the DOE JWS format to be used for all CRADAs. This 
format is also to be used by the Contractors when developing multi-laboratory CRADAs. 
The Statement of Work based on the work summary approved in the JWS will be made an 
annex to the CRADA. This JWS format may be supplemented by local field elements. 
The DOE Model CRADA (Attachment 3) and Alternate Clauses, Additional Articles and 
General Guidance (Attachment 4) contain the approved language to be used in a CRADA. 
Once a CRADA has been approved, any amendment to the CRADA, other than a no-cost 
extension, requires DOE approval. The mechanics for the approval of such an amendment 
shall be developed by the cognizant field element and should be consistent with this Order. 
It is recognized that other models may be developed through appropriate entities in DOE. 
These include the Model Short Form CRADA (Attachment 5). If there is any question as to 
the validity of other models, Departmental elements should consult with the Assistant 
General Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property. 
The Contractor may begin work at its own risk on a CRADA prior to the CRADA being 
approved by submitting a request for a preliminary determination to the Contracting Officer and 
by providing advanced funding. The Contractor may request a preliminary determination that the 
proposed CRADA scope of work is consistent with its contract and the DOE mission. The 
Contracting Officer will use his/her best efforts to provide such a determination within three (3) 
business days. Such a request shall include a JWS (if not previously approved) and a certification 
that the CRADA contains terms and conditions previously approved by DOE with no deviations. 
Attachment 2  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 2-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
Upon such a determination from the Contracting Officer, the Contractor may begin work under 
the CRADA at the Contractor’s risk pending final approval of the CRADA documentation. The 
Contractor must submit the CRADA signed by both the Contractor and the Participant, to the 
Contracting Officer for approval within (10) business days of the preliminary determination. 
The Contractor shall be responsible for providing adequate advance payment for CRADA work 
conducted after a preliminary determination has been made consistent with procedures defined in 
the Department’s Financial Management Handbook. All costs associated with the performance 
of work under a preliminary determination are the responsibility of the Contractor as no Federal 
funds will be used to fund any work conducted under a preliminary determination. In addition, 
for any obligations or liabilities arising due to Contractor’s work under a preliminary 
determination, the Contractor is entirely at risk and the Government shall bear no risk. 
The Contractor shall not request, and the Contracting Officer shall not approve a Contractor’s 
request, to begin work in advance of approval of the JWS and CRADA document if the 
Contractor, Contractor’s parent, member, subsidiary, or other entity in which the Contractor, 
Contractor’s parent, member or subsidiary has an equity interest is a party funding work in 
connection with the CRADA. Approval to work at the Contractors own risk shall not be granted 
for work with a Participant that is foreign owned or controlled, or which is using funds from a 
foreign source. 
Cognizant Secretarial Officers may (but are not required to) place a reasonable cap (e.g. $2M) on 
the amount of cost and/or liability that will be incurred by a Contractor arising from work 
performed during the period between a Contracting Officer’s preliminary determination and a 
Contracting Officer’s final approval of the work. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 3 
12-10-2016 Page 3-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
DOE MODEL CRADA 
This DOE Model CRADA (Attachment 3) and Alternate Clauses, Additional Articles and 
General Guidance (Attachment 4) are to be used by both the Laboratory and Participant to 
negotiate a final CRADA. DOE expects most laboratories to propose a Laboratory Model 
CRADA that will be approved by the cognizant DOE Head of Field Element, or if delegated 
to the cognizant Contracting Officer. These Laboratory Model CRADAs would be tailored 
from the DOE Model CRADA to specific M&O Contract and Contractor requirements. And 
for these reasons, each Laboratory Model CRADA may include additional articles, alternate 
clauses and/or custom language. Negotiations with a potential CRADA Participant would 
begin with the Laboratory Model CRADA and, if necessary, be modified appropriately 
using clauses from Attachment 4. For example, if the project involved the creation of 
software or trademarks, the appropriate clauses would be added to the Laboratory Model 
CRADA. Also, some laboratories may want more detail in Export Control Article or 
publication reviews (both in Attachment 4) as the standard language for that Laboratory 
Model CRADA. 
Double underline clauses and phrases require Assistant General Counsel for Technology 
Transfer and Intellectual Property approval to modify or remove. 
Submission of the JWS in accordance with the Joint Work Statement Format (Attachment 6) 
and the Laboratory CRADA will follow DOE policy and DOE field element requirements. 
Identification of specific Alternate Clauses, Additional Articles and General Guidance 
(Attachment 4) to be used in projects that deviate from the Laboratory Model CRADA will 
assist the cognizant DOE field element in reviewing/approving the CRADA package. 
 
Attachment 3 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 3-2 12-10-20164 
 
 
 
 
DOE MODEL CRADA 
STEVENSON-WYDLER (15 U.S.C. 3710a) 
COOPERATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
AGREEMENT (hereinafter "CRADA") No._____  
BETWEEN 
under its U.S. Department of Energy 
Contract No.________(hereinafter "Contractor"), 
AND 
(hereinafter "Participant"), 
both being hereinafter jointly referred to as the "Parties." 
 
ARTICLE I: DEFINITIONS 
A. "Background Intellectual Property" means the Intellectual Property identified by the 
Parties in Annex  , Background Intellectual Property, which was in existence prior 
to or is first produced outside of this CRADA, except that in the case of inventions in 
those identified items, the inventions must have been conceived outside of this 
CRADA and not first actually reduced to practice under this CRADA to qualify as 
Background Intellectual Property. 
 
B. "Contracting Officer" means the DOE employee administering the Contractor’s 
DOE contract. 
 
C. "DOE" means the Department of Energy, an agency of the Federal Government. 
 
D. "Generated Information" means information, including data, produced in the 
performance of this CRADA. 
 
E. "Government" means the Federal Government of the United States of America and 
agencies thereof. 
 
F. "Intellectual Property" means patents, trademarks, copyrights, mask works, 
Protected CRADA Information, and other forms of comparable property rights 
protected by Federal law and foreign counterparts, except trade secrets. 
 
G. "Proprietary Information" means information, including data, which is developed at 
private expense outside of this CRADA, is marked as Proprietary Information, and 
embodies (i) trade secrets or (ii) commercial or financial information which is 
DOE O 483.1B  Attachment 3 
12-10-2016  Page 3-3 
 
privileged or confidential under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552 
(b)(4)). 
 
H. "Protected CRADA Information" means Generated Information which is marked as 
being Protected CRADA Information by a Party to this CRADA and which would 
have been Proprietary Information had it been obtained from a non-Federal entity. 
 
I. "Subject Invention" means any invention of the Contractor or Participant conceived 
or first actually reduced to practice in the performance of work under this CRADA. 
 
ARTICLE II: STATEMENT OF WORK, TERM, FUNDING AND 
COSTS 
A. The Statement of Work is attached as Annex A. 
B. Notices: The names, postal addresses, telephone and email addresses for the Parties 
are provided in the Statement of Work. Any communications required by this 
CRADA, if given by postage prepaid first class U.S. Mail or other verifiable means 
addressed to the Party to receive the communication, shall be deemed made as of 
the day of receipt of such communication by the addressee, or on the date given if by 
email. Address changes shall be made by written notice and shall be effective 
thereafter. All such communications, to be considered effective, shall include the 
number of this CRADA.  
C. The effective date of this CRADA shall be the latter date of (1) the date on which it is 
signed by the last of the Parties or (2) the date on which it is approved by DOE. The 
work to be performed under this CRADA shall be completed within ____ 
months/years from the effective date. 
D. The Participant’s estimated contribution is $_____, of which $____ is fund-in to the 
Laboratory. The Government’s estimated contribution, which is provided through 
the Contractor’s contract with DOE, is $_____, subject to available funding. 
ARTICLE III: PERSONAL PROPERTY 
All tangible personal property produced or acquired under this CRADA shall become the 
property of the Participant or the Government, depending upon whose funds were used to 
obtain it unless identified in the Statement of Work as being owned by the other Party. 
Personal property shall be disposed of as directed by the owner at the owner’s expense. All 
jointly funded property shall be owned by the Government. The Participant shall maintain 
records of receipts, expenditures, and the disposition of all Government property in its 
custody related to the CRADA. 
  
Attachment 3 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 3-4 12-10-2016 
 
 
ARTICLE IV: DISCLAIMER 
THE GOVERNMENT, THE PARTICIPANT, AND THE CONTRACTOR MAKE NO 
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY AS TO THE CONDITIONS OF THE RESEARCH OR 
ANY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, GENERATED INFORMATION, OR PRODUCT MADE 
OR DEVELOPED UNDER THIS CRADA, OR THE OWNERSHIP, MERCHANTABILITY, 
OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH OR RESULTING 
PRODUCT. NEITHER THE GOVERNMENT, THE PARTICIPANT, NOR THE 
CONTRACTOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR 
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES ATTRIBUTED TO SUCH RESEARCH OR RESULTING 
PRODUCT, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, GENERATED INFORMATION, OR PRODUCT 
MADE OR DEVELOPED UNDER THIS CRADA. 
ARTICLE V: PRODUCT LIABILITY 
Except for any liability resulting from any negligent acts, willful misconduct or omissions of 
the Contractor and the Government, the Participant indemnifies the Government and the 
Contractor for all damages, costs, and expenses, including attorney’s fees, arising from 
personal injury or property damage occurring as a result of the making, using, or selling of 
a product, process, or service by or on behalf of the Participant, its assignees, or licensees, 
which was derived from the work performed under this CRADA. In respect to this article, 
neither the Government nor the Contractor shall be considered assignees or licensees of the 
Participant, as a result of reserved Government and Contractor rights. The indemnity set 
forth in this paragraph shall apply only if the Participant shall have been informed as soon 
and as completely as practical by the Contractor and/or the Government of the action 
alleging such claim and shall have been given an opportunity, to the maximum extent 
afforded by applicable laws, rules, or regulations, to participate in and control its defense, 
and the Contractor and/or the Government shall have provided all reasonably available 
information and reasonable assistance requested by the Participant. No settlement for 
which the Participant would be responsible shall be made without the Participant’s consent 
unless required by final decree of a court of competent jurisdiction.  
ARTICLE VI: RIGHTS IN SUBJECT INVENTIONS 
Wherein DOE has granted the Participant and the Contractor the right to elect to retain 
title to their respective Subject Inventions, and wherein the Participant has the option to 
choose an exclusive license, for reasonable compensation, for a pre-negotiated field of use 
to the Contractor’s Subject Inventions, 
A. Each Party shall have the first option to elect to retain title to any of its Subject 
Inventions and that election shall be made: (1) for the Participant, within 12 months 
of disclosure of the Subject Invention to DOE or (2) for the Contractor, within the 
time period specified in its prime contract for electing to retain title to Subject 
Inventions. However, such election shall occur not later than 60 days prior to the 
time when any statutory bar might foreclose filing of a U.S. Patent application. The 
electing Party has one year to file a patent application after such election unless any 
statutory bar exists. If a Party elects not to retain title to any of its Subject 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 3 
12-10-2016 Page 3-5 
 
 
Inventions or fails to timely file a patent application, the other Party shall have the 
second option to elect to obtain title to such Subject Invention within one year of 
notification and file a patent application within one year after such election, or no 
less than 30 days prior to a statutory bar, if any.  
B. The Parties agree to assign to DOE, as requested by DOE, the entire right, title and 
interest in any country to each Subject Invention where the Parties (1) do not elect 
pursuant to this article to retain/obtain such rights, or (2) elect to retain/obtain title 
to a Subject Invention but fail to have a patent application filed in that country on 
the Subject Invention or decide not to continue prosecution or not to pay any 
maintenance fees covering the Subject Invention. If DOE is granted a patent on 
Participant’s Subject Invention, the Participant may request a non-exclusive license 
and DOE will determine whether to grant such license pursuant to statutory 
authority.  
C. The Parties acknowledge that the Government retains a nonexclusive, 
nontransferable, irrevocable, paid-up license to practice or to have practiced for or 
on behalf of the United States every Subject Invention under this CRADA throughout 
the world. The Parties agree to execute a Confirmatory License to affirm the 
Government’s retained license.  
D. The Parties agree to disclose to each other each Subject Invention which may be 
patentable or otherwise protectable under U.S. patent law. The Parties agree that 
the Contractor and the Participant will disclose their respective Subject Inventions 
to DOE and each other within two (2) months after the inventor first discloses the 
Subject Invention in writing to the person(s) responsible for patent matters of the 
disclosing Party. 
These disclosures should be in sufficiently complete technical detail to convey a clear 
understanding, to the extent known at the time of the disclosure, of the nature, 
purpose, and operation of the Subject Invention. The disclosure shall also identify 
any known actual or potential statutory bars, e.g., printed publications describing 
the Subject Invention or the public use or "on sale" of the Subject Invention. The 
Parties further agree to disclose to each other any subsequently known actual or 
potential statutory bar that occurs for a Subject Invention disclosed but for which a 
patent application has not been filed. All Subject Invention disclosures shall be 
marked as confidential under 35 U.S.C. 205. 
E. The Parties agree to include within the beginning of the specification of any U.S. 
patent applications and any patent issuing thereon (including non-U.S. patents) 
covering a Subject Invention, the following statement: "This invention was made 
under a CRADA (identify CRADA number) between (name the Participant) and 
(name the laboratory) operated for the United States Department of Energy. The 
Government has certain rights in this invention." 
Attachment 3 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 3-6 12-10-2016 
 
 
F. The Parties acknowledge that DOE has certain march-in rights to any Subject 
Inventions in accordance with 48 CFR 27.304-1(g) and 15 U.S.C. 3710a(b)(1)(B) 
and (C). 
G. The Participant agrees to submit, for a period of five (5) years from the date of 
termination or completion of this CRADA and upon request of DOE, a 
nonproprietary report no more frequently than annually on efforts to utilize any 
Intellectual Property arising under the CRADA including information regarding 
compliance with U.S. Competitiveness provision of this CRADA. 
ARTICLE VII: RIGHTS IN DATA 
A. The Parties agree that they shall have no obligations of nondisclosure or limitations 
on their use of, and the Government shall have unlimited rights in, all Generated 
Information produced and information provided by the Parties under this CRADA, 
except for restrictions on data provided for in this Article or data disclosed in a 
Subject Invention disclosure being considered for Patent protection.  
B. PROPRIETARY INFORMATION: Each Party agrees to not disclose Proprietary 
Information provided by the other Party to anyone other than the CRADA 
Participant, Contractor and its subcontractors (if any) performing work under this 
CRADA without written approval of the providing Party, except to Government 
employees who are subject to the statutory provisions against disclosure of 
confidential information set forth in the Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. 1905). 
Government employees shall not be required to sign non-disclosure agreements due 
to the provisions of the above-cited statute.  
If Proprietary Information is orally disclosed to a Party, it shall be identified as 
such, orally, at the time of disclosure and confirmed in a written summary thereof, 
appropriately marked by the disclosing Party, within ____ days as being Proprietary 
Information. 
All Proprietary Information shall be protected for a period of _____ years from the 
effective date of this CRADA, unless such Proprietary Information becomes publicly 
known without the fault of the recipient, shall come into recipient’s possession 
without breach by the recipient of any of the obligations set forth herein, can be 
demonstrated by the recipient by written record that it is known prior to receipt from 
disclosing party, is disclosed by operation of law, or is independently developed by 
recipient’s employees who did not have access to such Proprietary Information. 
C. PROTECTED CRADA INFORMATION: Except where a Participant’s Federal 
funding agreement prohibits such protection, each Party may designate and mark as 
Protected CRADA Information any Generated Information produced by its 
employees, which meets the definition in Article I and, with the agreement of the 
other Party, so designate any Generated Information produced by the other Party’s 
employees which meets the definition in Article I. All such designated Protected 
CRADA Information shall be appropriately marked. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 3 
12-10-2016 Page 3-7 
 
 
For a period of _____ [not to exceed 5 years] from the date Protected CRADA 
Information is produced, the Parties agree not to further disclose such information 
and to use the same degree of care and discretion, but no less than reasonable care 
and discretion, to avoid disclosure, publication or dissemination of such information 
to a third party, as the Party employs for similar protection of its own information 
which it does not desire to disclose, publish, or disseminate except: 
(1)  as necessary to perform this CRADA; 
(2)  as published in a patent application or an issued patent before the protection 
period expires;  
(3)  as provided in Article X [REPORTS AND PUBLICATIONS]; 
(4)  as requested by the DOE Contracting Officer to be provided to other DOE 
facilities for use only at those DOE facilities solely for Government use only 
with the same protection in place and marked accordingly..  
(5)  when a specific maximum time period for delaying the public release of data 
is authorized in the terms of a Government funding agreement used to fund 
this CRADA and that maximum period is shorter than the time period set forth 
in this Article for protecting Protected CRADA Information;  
(6)  to existing or potential licensees, affiliates, customers, or suppliers of the 
Parties in support of commercialization of the technology with the same 
protection in place. Disclosure of the Participant’s Protected CRADA 
Information under this subparagraph shall only be done with the 
Participant’s consent; or 
(7)  as mutually agreed to by the Parties in advance.  
The obligations of this paragraph shall end sooner for any Protected CRADA 
Information which shall become publicly known without fault of either Party, shall 
come into a Party’s possession without breach by that Party of the obligations of 
paragraph above, or shall be independently developed by a Party’s employees who 
did not have access to the Protected CRADA Information. Federal Government 
employees who are subject to 18 USC 1905 may have access to Protected CRADA 
Information and shall not be required to sign non-disclosure agreements due to the 
provisions of the statute. 
D. COPYRIGHT: The Parties may assert Copyright in any of their Generated 
Information. Assertion of Copyright generally means to enforce or give an 
indication of an intent or right to enforce such as by marking or securing Federal 
registration. Copyrights in co-authored works by employees of the Parties shall be 
held jointly, and use by either Party shall be without accounting. 
Attachment 3 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 3-8 12-10-2016 
 
 
For all Generated Information, the Government has for itself and others acting on its 
behalf, a royalty-free, nontransferable, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide 
copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the 
public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the 
Government, in all copyrightable works produced in the performance of this 
CRADA, subject to the restrictions this Article places on publication of Proprietary 
Information and Protected CRADA Information.  
The Parties agree that no computer software will be created under this CRADA. If 
the scope of work changes to create computer software, then the CRADA will be 
amended accordingly. 
The Parties agree to place Copyright and other notices, as appropriate for the 
protection of Copyright, in human-readable form onto all physical media, and in 
digitally encoded form in the header of machine-readable information recorded on 
such media such that the notice will appear in human-readable form when the digital 
data are off loaded or the data are accessed for display or printout. 
ARTICLE VIII: U.S. COMPETITIVENESS 
The Parties agree that a purpose of this CRADA is to provide substantial benefit to the U.S. 
economy. 
A. In exchange for the benefits received under this CRADA, the Participant therefore 
agrees to the following: 
(1)  Products embodying Intellectual Property developed under this CRADA shall 
be substantially manufactured in the United States, and 
(2)  Processes, services, and improvements thereof which are covered by 
Intellectual Property developed under this CRADA shall be incorporated into 
the Participant’s manufacturing facilities in the United States either prior to 
or simultaneously with implementation outside the United States. Such 
processes, services, and improvements, when implemented outside the United 
States, shall not result in reduction of the use of the same processes, services, 
or improvements in the United States. 
B. The Contractor agrees to a U.S. Industrial Competitiveness clause in accordance 
with its prime contract with respect to any licensing and assignments of its 
Intellectual Property arising from this CRADA, except that any licensing or 
assignment of its intellectual property rights to the Participant shall be in 
accordance with the terms of paragraph A of this Article. 
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 3 
12-10-2016 Page 3-9 
 
 
ARTICLE IX: EXPORT CONTROL 
THE PARTIES UNDERSTAND THAT MATERIALS AND INFORMATION RESULTING 
FROM THE PERFORMANCE OF THIS CRADA MAY BE SUBJECT TO EXPORT 
CONTROL LAWS AND THAT EACH PARTY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ITS OWN 
COMPLIANCE WITH SUCH LAWS. EXPORT LICENSES OR OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS 
FROM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT MAY BE REQUIRED FOR THE EXPORT OF GOODS, 
TECHNICAL DATA OR SERVICES UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. THE PARTIES 
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT EXPORT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS MAY CHANGE AND THAT 
THE EXPORT OF GOODS, TECHNICAL DATA OR SERVICES FROM THE U.S. WITHOUT 
AN EXPORT LICENSE OR OTHER APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORIZATION 
MAY RESULT IN CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
ARTICLE X: REPORTS AND PUBLICATIONS 
A. The Parties agree to produce the following deliverables and provide to DOE Office 
of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI): 
(1) an initial abstract suitable for public release at the time the CRADA is 
executed;  
(2)  a final report, upon completion or termination of this CRADA, to include a 
list of Subject Inventions; and 
(3) other scientific and technical information in any format or medium that is 
produced as a result of this CRADA that is useful to the Government or the 
public as specified by and upon request from DOE no later than two years from 
submission of the final report to OSTI. 
The Parties acknowledge that the Contractor has the responsibility to timely provide 
the above information to OSTI. Furthermore, item (2) above should also be provided 
to the DOE field office.  
B. The Parties agree to secure pre-publication review from each other wherein the non-
publishing Party shall provide within 30 days any written objections to be 
considered by the publishing Party. 
C. The Parties agree that neither will use the name of the other Party or its employees 
in any promotional activity, such as advertisements, with reference to any product 
or service resulting from this CRADA, without prior written approval of the other 
Party. 
ARTICLE XI: FORCE MAJEURE 
No failure or omission by the Contractor or the Participant in the performance of any 
obligation under this CRADA shall be deemed a breach of this CRADA or create any 
Attachment 3 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 3-10 12-10-2016 
 
 
liability if the same shall arise from any cause or causes beyond the control of the 
Contractor or the Participant, including but not limited to the following, which, for the 
purpose of this CRADA, shall be regarded as beyond the control of the Party in question: 
Acts of God, acts or omissions of any government or agency thereof, compliance with 
requirements, rules, regulations, or orders of any governmental authority or any office, 
department, agency, or instrumentality thereof, fire, storm, flood, earthquake, accident, 
acts of the public enemy, war, rebellion, insurrection, riot, sabotage, invasion, 
quarantine, restriction, transportation embargoes, or failures or delays in transportation. 
ARTICLE XII: DISPUTES 
The Parties shall attempt to jointly resolve all disputes arising from this CRADA. In the 
event a dispute arises under this CRADA, the Participant is encouraged to contact 
Contractor’s Technology Partnerships Ombudsman in order to further resolve such 
dispute before pursuing third-party mediation or other remedies. If the Parties are unable 
to jointly resolve a dispute within 60 days, they agree to submit the dispute to a third-
party mediation process that is mutually agreed upon by the Parties. To the extent that 
there is no applicable U.S. Federal law, this CRADA and performance thereunder shall 
be governed by the laws of the State of _________, without reference to that state’s 
conflict of laws provisions. 
ARTICLE XIII: ENTIRE CRADA, MODIFICATIONS, 
ADMINISTRATION AND TERMINATION 
A. This CRADA with its annexes contains the entire agreement between the Parties 
with respect to the subject matter hereof, and all prior representations or 
agreements relating hereto have been merged into this document and are thus 
superseded in totality by this CRADA.  
B. Any agreement to materially change any terms or conditions of this CRADA or the 
annexes shall be valid only if the change is made in writing, executed by the 
Parties hereto, and approved by DOE.  
C. The Contractor enters into this CRADA under the authority of its prime contract 
with DOE. The Contractor is authorized to and will administer this CRADA in all 
respects unless otherwise specifically provided for herein. Administration of this 
CRADA may be transferred from the Contractor to DOE or its designee with 
notice of such transfer to the Participant, and the Contractor shall have no further 
responsibilities except for the confidentiality, use and/or nondisclosure obligations 
of this CRADA. 
D. This CRADA may be terminated by either Party upon ___ days written notice to 
the other Party. If Article III provides for advance funding, this CRADA may also 
DOE O 483.1B  Attachment 3 
12-10-2016  Page 3-11 (and Page3-12) 
 
be terminated by the Contractor in the event of failure by the Participant to 
provide the necessary advance funding. 
In the event of termination by either Party, each Party shall be responsible for its 
share of the costs incurred through the effective date of termination, as well as its 
share of the costs incurred after the effective date of termination, and which are 
related to the termination. 
FOR CONTRACTOR: FOR PARTICIPANT: 
BY ______________  BY_______________ 
TITLE ___________  TITLE____________ 
DATE ___________  DATE_____________ 
 

DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
TAILORABILITY, ALTERNATE CLAUSES, ADDITIONAL ARTICLES AND 
GENERAL GUIDANCE 
I. Tailorability 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
In unique situations, where the standard terms and conditions of a CRADA are not workable, field 
elements may modify, add to or remove certain standard terms and conditions. Any changes to the 
standard terms and conditions must be covered by and not conflict with DOE’s statutory CRADA 
authority, not conflict with the terms of the applicable M&O contract, and be approved by the 
cognizant DOE CO with concurrence from DOE Patent Counsel.  
Unique situations include, but are not limited to, transactions that lack a great deal of human 
collaboration or those with certain federal flow-down requirements. In extraordinary situations, a 
third-party agreement may be entered into under DOE’s CRADA authority as long as it is 
appropriately covered by, and not in conflict with statutory CRADA requirements or the terms of 
the applicable M&O contract and is approved by the cognizant DOE CO with concurrence from 
DOE Patent Counsel. 
As DOE develops or approves changes to the standard terms and conditions of a 
CRADA that may apply, or might be useful at more than one facility, it will endeavor to post 
such examples on the Office of Technology Transitions website to make such examples more 
widely available, although their use will still be subject to Contracting Officer approval. 
OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE TO ADDRESS FEDERAL FLOWDOWNS: 
The Facility Contractor’s performance of the SOW shall be conducted consistent with the terms 
and conditions of its M&O Contract with DOE and is subject only to the terms and conditions of 
the CRADA and the terms and conditions of the M&O Contract. If the Participant’s funding is 
secured through an agency award (such as a SBIR, STTR, Cooperative Agreement or Federal 
Contract), the Contractor and Participant should determine whether the terms and conditions of 
the agency award, including the intellectual property terms and conditions and any flow-down 
provisions, conflict with the terms and conditions of the CRADA. The Participant should seek 
guidance or a variance from the agency issuing the award regarding any perceived or actual 
conflicts. However, the Contractor and Participant may request changes in the CRADA to 
address any perceived or actual conflicts between the CRADA and the agency award. Any 
changes to the CRADA must be covered by and not conflict with DOE’s statutory CRADA 
authority, not conflict with the terms of the applicable M&O contract and be approved by the 
cognizant DOE CO with concurrence from DOE Patent Counsel. All costs associated with these 
types of changes must be reimbursed by the Participant. 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
II. ALTERNATE CLAUSES 
In addition to the guidance in the Tailorability section above, Laboratories can replace clauses in 
the DOE Model CRADA or Laboratory Model CRADA with language from this Attachment as 
appropriate. These clauses are pre-approved by DOE and rarely require specific DOE approval. 
Use of one of these pre-approved clauses is encouraged as it will speed up the review and 
approval process for the CRADA by the DOE field office. 
ARTICLE I: DEFINITIONS 
These definitions may be added when appropriate: 
ADDITIONAL DEFINITION: Affiliate 
Any of the following definitions for Affiliate can be used when the CRADA is with a 
consortium or the CRADA Participant is a subsidiary or parent company. The CRADA may 
be appropriately modified to extend the rights and responsibilities to Affiliates (particularly 
regarding intellectual property). 
"Affiliate" means any entity in which the Participant owns or controls, directly or 
indirectly, at least 50% of the voting stock or equity.  
"Affiliate" means the member companies of __________________ [consortium] and 
any entity designated by such a member company, in which the member company 
owns or controls, directly or indirectly, at least 50% of the voting stock or equity. 
"Affiliate(s)" of a Party means any company, partnership or other legal entity that 
directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a 
Party hereto, either (1) by direct or indirect ownership of over 50 percent of the 
outstanding shares of the entity or the party, or (2) by directly or indirectly having 
the right to designate over 50 percent of its directors or in the case of any entity 
other than a corporation, persons exercising similar authority. 
ADDITIONAL DEFINITION: Foreign Interests 
When the need for a foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) review has been 
determined to exist and where Article IX, Export Control, has been appropriately modified, 
the following two definitions should be added: 
"Foreign Interest" is defined as any of the following: 
(1) A foreign government or foreign government agency; 
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-3 
 
 
(2) Any form of business enterprise organized under the laws of any country 
other than the United States or its possessions; 
(3) Any form of business enterprise organized or incorporated under the laws of 
the United States, or a State or other jurisdiction within the United States, 
which is owned, controlled, or influenced by a foreign government, agency, 
firm, corporation or person; or 
(4) Any person who is not a U.S. citizen. 
"Foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI)" means the situation where the 
degree of ownership, control, or influence over a Participant by a foreign interest is 
such that a reasonable basis exists for concluding that compromise of classified 
information or special nuclear material, as defined in 10 CFR Part 710.5, may 
result. 
ADDITIONAL DEFINITION: Laboratory Tangible Research Products 
If Laboratory Tangible Research Products (LTRP) are likely to be developed in the 
CRADA, this definition and an alternate Personal Property provision (Article III) may be 
used. 
"Laboratory Tangible Research Products" or "LTRP" means tangible material 
results of research that: (i) can be used for replication, reproduction, evaluation or 
confirmation of the research effort, or to evaluate its potential commercial utility; (ii) 
are not materials generally commercially available; and (iii) were made by one or 
more of the Parties in the performance of this CRADA. LTRP includes, without 
limitation, "Laboratory Biological Materials," which is a biological material that 
can be replicated or reproduced, such as plasmids, deoxyribonucleic acid molecules, 
ribonucleic acid molecules, living organisms of any sort and their progeny, including 
viruses, prokaryote and eukaryote cell lines, transgenic plants and animals, and any 
derivatives or modifications thereof or products produced through their use or 
associated biological products. 
ADDITIONAL DEFINITION: Other Protected Data 
The following definition may be added if the CRADA involves Federal funding (from DOE 
or other agencies) that allows restrictions on release and marking of data (an additional 
paragraph in Article VII Rights in Data references this definition): 
"Other Protected Data" means data first produced in the performance of an award, 
contract, or other agreement with DOE or another federal agency which is marked 
as being protected from public disclosure or other uses for a particular period time 
in accordance with that award, contract, other agreement or other statutory 
authority.  
  
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-4 12-10-2016 
 
 
ALTERNATE DEFINITIONS: These alternate definitions may be used if desired: 
"Intellectual Property" means patents, copyrights, trademarks and mask works 
protected by Federal law and foreign counterparts, except trade secrets.  
"Proprietary Information" means information, including data, which embodies (i) 
trade secrets or (ii) commercial or financial information which is privileged or 
confidential under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552 (b)(4)), either of 
which is developed at private expense outside of this CRADA and which is marked as 
Proprietary Information.  
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
A definition section must include definitions for DOE Contracting Officer, DOE, Generated 
Information, Subject Invention, and any other terms that would be used in the CRADA. 
Additional definitions can be added based on the scope of work performed under the 
CRADA. The definitions for Trademark and Mask Works are located in the Additional 
Articles section below.  
The definition for Background Intellectual Property (see Attachment 3, Article I) may not be 
all-inclusive (e.g., pre-existing invention disclosures, which may become Subject Inventions 
if reduced to practice under the CRADA, or copyrighted software). It is essential that the 
existence of this additional Background Intellectual Property be brought to the attention of 
the Participant before the CRADA is signed. This can be done by either changing the 
definition or by using a separate article on Background Intellectual Property to recognize 
such Background Intellectual Property. Additionally, it should be made clear either in an 
annex listing Background Intellectual Property or in one of the separate articles on 
Background Intellectual Property, if used, that the only Background Intellectual Property 
that need be identified is that necessary to perform the CRADA or practice the results of the 
CRADA, as appropriate.  
ARTICLE II: STATEMENT OF WORK, TERM, FUNDING 
AND COSTS 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: The following paragraph can be used for paragraph C for 
CRADAs where the Participant will send advance funds to the Contractor. 
The effective date of this CRADA shall be the latter date of (1) the date on which it is 
signed by the last of the Parties, (2) the date on which it is approved by DOE, or (3) 
the date on which the advance funding referred to in this Article is received by the 
Contractor. The work to be performed under this CRADA shall be completed within 
______ months/years from the effective date. 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: The following paragraph can be used for paragraph D for 
CRADAs where the Participant will provide 100% funds for the CRADA. It is understood 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-5 
 
 
that the CRADA must include elements of collaboration between the Parties when 
Participant provides all the funding for the CRADA.  
The Participant’s estimated contribution is $ _______ . 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Advance Payment and Funding 
The following provides advance payment funding requirements to be included in paragraph 
E. They are all consistent with current DOE policy on requiring advance payments, as 
elaborated in the DOE’s Financial Management Handbook, Chapter 13. Contract specialists 
will need to consult the handbook for the latest information. 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS: 
(3)  Provision to be used for most Participants, where the work (for Participant’s 
funds-in share) is greater than $25,000 and will last longer than 60 days.  
The Participant shall provide to the Contractor, prior to any work being 
performed, a budgetary resource sufficient to cover anticipated work that will 
be performed for the Participants directly funded share for the first billing 
cycle. In addition, the Participant shall provide 60 days of additional funding 
to ensure that funds remain available for the Participants directly funded 
share for subsequent billing cycles. 
A billing cycle is the period of time between billings, usually 30 days. The 
billing cycle is complete when the customer is billed for services rendered. 
However, with Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) or Small 
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Awards described under Chapter 13 of 
the Financial Management Handbook, the maximum funding that can be 
collected from the Participant may not exceed 30 days of work to be 
performed under the contract. Please see Chapter 13 for additional 
requirements and funding available for these types of awards. 
(4)  Provision where the Participant’s contribution in direct funds to the 
contractor is $25,000 or less or where the work will be completed in 60 days 
or less: 
The Participant shall provide Contractor full funding prior to beginning work 
covered by those funds. 
However, with Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) or Small 
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Awards described under Chapter 13 of 
the Financial Management Handbook, the maximum funding that can be 
collected from the Participant may not exceed 30 days of work to be 
performed under the contract. Please see Chapter 13 for additional 
requirements and funding available for these types of awards. 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-6 12-10-2016 
 
 
(5)  Additional Funding Requirements 
Field CFOs or Site Offices may require additional advance payments to 
account for estimated termination costs or other costs as appropriate for 
individual projects.  
(6)  No DOE budgetary resources under this CRADA shall be utilized to fund 
work directly to CRADA Participant. 
Exceptions to Funding Requirements  
Exceptions to DOE’s normal advance funding requirements can be found under Chapter 
13 of the Financial Management Handbook.  
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
The CRADA must include a Statement of Work, which must include a technical description 
of the scope encompassed by the proposed CRADA, including tasks, the party responsible 
for the tasks, and a list of deliverables (reports, prototypes, etc.). The Statement of Work 
should also include who the principal investigators for each party will be; the contact 
information for official notices unless an Additional Article For NOTICES (below) is added 
to the CRADA; who will provide what funds, personnel, services, and property; who will do 
what reporting on the work; and procedures for interaction between the parties to 
accomplish the Statement of Work, which is the objective of the CRADA. The parties may 
also wish to set forth levels of commitment to the CRADA, in terms of full-time equivalent 
numbers of various staff and personnel classifications. 
Any Proprietary Information included in the Statement of Work should be clearly marked. 
However, Proprietary Information should not be included in the Statement of Work unless 
the parties consider it absolutely necessary to define the work. The name of the Participant 
cannot be considered proprietary. Cooperative research performed in CRADAs involves 
industrial Participants that have information which they consider to be of commercial value. 
Such commercially valuable information could possibly be divulged in the formal CRADA 
document, including the incorporated Statement of Work. Because taxpayer funds are used 
in the Government share of CRADAs, it is possible that there will be requests for public 
release of the formal CRADA document. Commercially valuable information that the 
Participant considers sensitive should not routinely be included in the CRADA, including 
the accompanying Statement of Work, unless specifically needed. Should DOE receive a 
request for public release of the formal CRADA document, only business-sensitive or 
proprietary information that qualifies under 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4) will be exempt from release 
after appropriate review. 
In accordance with this order, each CRADA must provide a benefit consistent with the 
program missions at the facility and the facility mission established by the Cognizant 
Secretarial Officer and must involve collaboration between the CRADA Participant and the 
DOE laboratory). CRADAs supported by 100% direct funds-in from the Participant must 
also include elements of in-kind contributions by the Participant. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-7 
 
 
There must be a statement of funding for the CRADA, showing the estimated contributions 
of the parties. The statement must clearly state that the Government’s estimated contribution 
is provided through the contractor’s contract with DOE and is subject to available funding, 
except for 100% funds-in CRADAs, for which there is no Government contribution. The 
statement may indicate that the Participant’s contributions are also subject to availability of 
funds and should include provisions that describe the obligations of the parties relative to 
exceeding the estimated costs. If the cost of the CRADA exceeds the estimated 
contributions, then CRADA will need to be amended to increase the amounts.  
The statement of funding must include a provision addressing advance payment 
requirements whenever there are "funds-in" from the Participant. The contractor may not 
agree to waive advance payments unless the contractor is using its own funds (e.g., from 
royalties, award/management fees or non-Federal corporate funds). The contractor may, 
however, negotiate variations to the standard advance payment requirement for small 
businesses and others, consistent with Chapter 13 of DOE’s Financial Management 
Handbook.  
Program officers and Cognizant Secretarial Officers may provide supplemental guidance on 
funding and other issues to the Head of the Field Element to help avoid surprises and ensure 
effective coordination of CRADAs and management of multi-year resource requirements. 
For example, there could be specific requirements to get either written approval from, or 
provide written notice to, the Cognizant Secretarial Officer and/or the appropriate program 
office for 100% funds-in CRADAs involving more than $1 million dollars total effort per 
year. 
Under current DOE policy, funds previously obtained from Federal sources can be used to 
finance a non-Federal Participant’s share of a project. One of the purposes of CRADAs is to 
stimulate private investment in collaborations with laboratories. It is important that the 
overall program be supported with significant private funds. However, DOE generally is 
unconcerned if the funds for the Participant’s share of a specific CRADA come ultimately 
from some other Federal program, so long as the decision process for obtaining those funds 
precedes the final CRADA negotiation and the obtaining of those funds complies with the 
rules of that process. If the funds come from some other part of the Department, extra care 
must be taken to ensure that there is no real or apparent conflict of interest and that there is 
fairness of opportunity.  
Other contractual obligations of the Participant with respect to the Government are not 
overridden by this CRADA. 
ARTICLE III: PERSONAL PROPERTY 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Any of the following options could be used instead. 
  
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-8 12-10-2016 
 
 
OPTION 1: 
All tangible personal property produced or acquired under this CRADA (specifically 
excluding Intellectual Property rights, Background Intellectual Property, and 
Proprietary Information) shall become the property of the Participant or the 
Government, depending upon whose funds were used to obtain it. Personal property 
shall be disposed of as directed by the owner at the owner’s expense. There shall not 
be any jointly funded property under this CRADA except by the mutual agreement of 
the Parties. The Participant shall maintain records of receipts, expenditures, and the 
disposition of all Government property in its custody related to the CRADA. 
OPTION 2: 
Participant shall have title to any tangible personal property the Contractor 
produces or acquires using solely the Participant’s funds under this CRADA whose 
cost is greater than $5,000 (unless identified otherwise in Annex A). The Government 
shall have title to all other tangible personal property produced or acquired by the 
Contractor. The Participant shall maintain records of receipts, expenditures, and the 
disposition of all Government property in its custody related to the CRADA and with 
a value greater than $5,000. 
OPTION 3: Laboratory Tangible Research Products (LTRP) 
Definition of Laboratory Tangible Research Products (LTRP) should be added to 
Article I if using this option 
Participant shall have title to any tangible personal property the Contractor 
produces (other than Laboratory Tangible Research Products) or acquires using 
solely the Participant’s funds under this CRADA whose cost is greater than $5,000, 
unless identified otherwise in Annex A. The Government shall have title to all other 
tangible personal property produced or acquired by the Contractor. The Participant 
shall maintain records of receipts, expenditures, and the disposition of all 
Government property with a value greater than $___ in its custody related to the 
CRADA 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Transferring Title of Property 
Personal property provided by the Participant for use in this CRADA may be 
permanently transferred to Government ownership, so long as the Parties mutually 
agree to such transfer, and an appropriate DOE or other Federal agency program 
representative verifies that the personal property would have continuing value to 
Government-funded research efforts. 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Inspecting Government Property 
Where Government property will be under the Participant’s control, Contractors should 
include language regarding periodic access, inspection, inventory, and records of the 
property. In such a case, the Contractor may choose to add the following language: 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-9 
 
 
The Participant shall, with reasonable notice, grant to the Government and to the 
Contractor periodic access to Participant’s premises during regular business hours 
for the purposes of inspection of CRADA-related Government property in its custody. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
There must be agreement among the parties as to who will retain what tangible property, if 
any is to be obtained, acquired, produced, or modified in the course of the CRADA. 
Remember that Government property disposal regulations pertain to any property in which 
Government money is involved. 
ARTICLE IV: DISCLAIMER 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
There must be a disclaimer of express or implied warranties as to the conduct of the 
research. This statement should be in the form of a Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)-type 
disclaimer, which should be conspicuous in the CRADA so as to meet the standards of due 
notice. One way to do this is to use bold type, all capital letters, or to have an especially 
large type font specifying the disclaimer. 
ARTICLE V: PRODUCT LIABILITY 
OPTION 1: Use of Hold Harmless Provision 
As an alternate to using the standard language for product liability, a hold harmless 
provision may be substituted therefor, such as the following: 
Except for any liability resulting from any negligent acts or omissions of the 
Contractor or the Government, the Participant agrees to hold harmless the 
Government and the Contractor for all damages, costs, and expenses, 
including attorney’s fees, arising from personal injury or property damage 
occurring as a result of the making, using, or selling of a product, process, or 
service by or on behalf of the Participant, its assignees, or licensees, which 
was derived from the work performed under this CRADA. 
OPTION 2: States and State Agencies 
Most U.S. States prohibit indemnification obligations. Furthermore, State Agencies 
and State colleges or universities do not commercialize technology, but license it to 
third parties. Therefore, the following clause may be used when the CRADA 
involves a U.S. State, a State Agency, a State college or university, or a political 
subdivision of a State or an agency thereof: 
For licenses granted or assignment made by the Participant to any third party 
in Intellectual Property derived from the work performed under this CRADA, 
such licenses or assignments shall include the requirement that the third party 
shall indemnify the Government, Contractor, and Participant for all damages, 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-10 12-10-2016 
 
 
costs, and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, arising from personal injury or 
property damage occurring as a result of the making, using, or selling of a 
product, process, or service by or on behalf of such third party, its assignees, 
or licensees, provided, however, such third parties shall not be required to 
indemnify the Government, Contractor or Participant for any negligent acts 
or omissions made by the Government, Contractor or Participant 
respectively. 
OPTION 3: Purchase of Product Liability Insurance 
The Participant or the Contractor may agree to purchase and maintain adequate 
product liability insurance to protect the Government and the Contractor against 
product liability claims. The cost for this insurance shall not be charged directly or 
indirectly to the Government. Product liability insurance is appropriate for CRADAs 
when there is a high risk of personal injury or property damage from using the 
product, process, or service derived from work performed under the CRADA. An 
example of a suitable provision is:  
The (Participant, Contractor, or Parties) agree to obtain and maintain product 
liability insurance in the amount of $_____ during the life of this CRADA and 
subsequently for the life of any products, processes, or services resulting from work 
under the CRADA. The Government and the Contractor shall be covered against any 
claims for product liability as a result of this insurance. A copy of this product 
liability insurance policy shall be provided to both the Government and the 
Contractor, including any material modifications thereto, including any notices of 
termination. 
OPTION 4: Public Domain or Not Commercialized 
If the Participant will either put all intellectual property developed under the CRADA 
in the public domain (such as publishing the data and inventions, or releasing the 
information or not marking as Protected CRADA Information) or does not plan to 
commercialize, the following statement can used in place of a Product Liability 
clause:  
The Participant agrees that all of its Intellectual Property generated under 
this Agreement will be placed in the public domain (with the appropriate 
disclaimer) or the results will be a product, process, or service unlikely to be 
commercialized. Therefore, a standard Product Liability provision where the 
Participant would indemnify the Contractor and the Government is not 
included in this CRADA.  
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
If the results of the research covered by the CRADA are restricted in any way for the 
purpose of commercialization (such as through patents, copyrights, or Protected CRADA 
Information), or if there is a specific, identifiable laboratory technology being transferred, 
there must be a provision that indemnifies the Contractor and the Government from all costs 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-11 
 
 
related to personal injury and property damage that may result from the Participant’s 
commercialization and use of a product, process, or service. The protection should usually 
take the form of the above provision on product liability. 
Special situations may provide for use of Option 4 where standard product liability 
provision is not used. Since the Contractor would license its Intellectual Property under its 
M&O Contract requiring product liability protection, this option is limited to the Participant 
agreeing not to commercialize its intellectual property. The following are examples of use of 
this option: 
(7)  When the results will be a product, process, or service unlikely to be 
commercialized (e.g., basic research), circumstances must be such that they 
justify the exclusion of the product liability indemnity provision from the 
CRADA. Such determinations will be made on a case-by-case basis and will 
be supported by facts indicating there is little or no potential risk of liability to 
the Government or the Contractor. Approval from the DOE Contracting 
Officer will be required when this occurs.  
(8)  When the results are to be placed totally in the public domain (i.e., no 
Protected CRADA Information or Intellectual Property) and accompanied by 
a DOE-approved disclaimer; if the purpose of the CRADA is to provide 
information which is intended to be placed in the public domain with an 
appropriate disclaimer provision, a product liability provision need not be 
used. 
NOTE: If during the CRADA project, the Participant finds that the results will be a 
product, process, or service to be commercialized, then the CRADA can be amended 
to include a standard Product Liability clause. If the CRADA is completed, the 
Participant will need to execute a side agreement for product liability to protect the 
Contractor and Government.  
If the Participant is a state entity (e.g. U.S. state university or college), the phrase "to the 
extent permitted by [name of state] State law" may be added to the beginning of the clause 
in the DOE Model CRADA. This is only permissible per letter from the state Attorney 
General for particular states, this provision may be suitably modified or deleted with DOE 
Contracting Officer approval after conferring with cognizant DOE Patent Counsel. 
ARTICLE VI:  RIGHTS IN SUBJECT INVENTIONS  
PARAGRAPH A: The Contractor, with approval of cognizant DOE Patent Counsel, may 
tailor its own Laboratory Model CRADA language for providing rights for the Participant 
and Contractor regarding ownership of Subject Inventions in lieu of the standard version in 
the CRADA. The invention rights provisions in a CRADA should insure timely reporting 
and patenting of Subject Inventions. As prudence dictates modifying any deadlines (e.g. 
reporting) contained in the clause to better implement changes in the laws, the Assistant 
General Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property will provide model 
language.  
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-12 12-10-2016 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Joint Inventions can also be addressed in Paragraph A by 
adding the following clause: 
For Subject Inventions that are joint Subject Inventions of the Contractor and the 
Participant, title to such Subject Inventions shall be jointly owned by the Contractor and 
the Participant. 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Requiring Cooperation in Preparing Patent Applications: 
If a patent application is filed by the non-inventing Party ("Filing Party"), the 
inventing Party shall reasonably cooperate and assist the Filing Party, at the Filing 
Party’s expense, in executing a written assignment of the Subject Invention to the 
Filing Party and in otherwise perfecting the patent application, and the Filing Party 
shall have the right to control the prosecution of the patent application. The Parties 
shall agree among themselves as to who will file patent applications on any joint 
Subject Invention. 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Cross Licensing Provision 
Each Party grants the other Party a nonexclusive, transferable, irrevocable, paid-up 
license to practice or to have practiced for or on behalf of that Party every Subject 
Invention arising out of this CRADA throughout the world, with a right to grant 
sublicenses of no greater scope to others. 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Commercializing In Different Countries 
When it is appropriate for each party to lead commercialization in different countries, and the 
paragraphs regarding filing of patent applications and costs have been addressed, the following 
provisions may be added. 
(9)  The Contractor grants to Participant an exclusive, royalty-free license, 
including the right to sublicense, in each patent application filed in 
____________[country] on any Contractor Subject Invention and any 
resulting patent in ____________[country] from such patent application in 
which the Contractor acquires title. The Participant grants to Contractor an 
exclusive, royalty-free license, including the right to sublicense, in each 
patent application filed in the United States on any Participant Subject 
Invention and any resulting patent in the United States from such patent 
application in which the Participant acquires title.  
(10)  Each Party grants to the other Party a nonexclusive, transferable irrevocable, 
paid-up license to practice or to have practiced for or on behalf of that Party 
every Subject Invention arising out of this CRADA in any country other than 
____________[country] or the United States, with a right to grant 
sublicenses of no greater scope to others. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-13 
 
 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE: Laboratory Subcontracts 
If the Contractor will be issuing subcontracts to perform work listed in the Statement of 
Work of the CRADA, and where the subcontracts are not funded with Federal funds or are 
otherwise subject to exceptional circumstances (e.g. 37 C.F.R. 401.3), there should be a 
paragraph addressing the Participant’s option for a field-of-use license in the subcontractor’s 
subject inventions in compliance with National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act 
of 1995 (see General Guidance section below regarding the ACT). Also, the Contractor 
should ensure that similar requirements are in the subcontract with the Subcontractor.  
The following definitions should be added to Article I: 
"Subcontractor" means a subcontractor of the Contractor or Participant at any tier. 
The following paragraph should be added to this Article: 
For each Subject Invention made by a Subcontractor of the Contractor performing work 
under this CRADA, Participant shall have the option during and for a period of 
_________ months after the Subject Invention of the Contractor’s Subcontractor is 
reported to DOE and Contractor, to obtain a license within the field of use that 
Participant and Contractor have agreed upon. The license shall be on reasonable terms 
and conditions agreed upon by Participant and the Subcontractor, including the payment 
of negotiated license fees and royalties. 
General Guidance: If Federal funds (from Contractor or Participant’s funds-in) are used 
and no exceptional circumstance exists (e.g. 37 C.F.R. 401.3), Bayh-Dole applies such 
that the subcontractor does not have to provide an exclusive license to Participant. If the 
Subcontractor does not qualify under Bayh-Dole (i.e., large business), then a patent 
waiver may need to be issued by DOE Patent Counsel.  
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Exclusive License to Participant.  
The Parties can modify the standard preamble to this Article by replacing "and wherein the 
Participant has the option to choose an exclusive license, for reasonable compensation, for a 
pre-negotiated field of use to the Contractor’s Subject Invention" with the following: 
The Participant acknowledges that the Contractor has offered to the Participant the 
option to choose an exclusive license for a pre-negotiated field of use for reasonable 
compensation for any Subject Invention made in whole or in part by a Contractor employee. 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE: Exclusive License to Participant.  
The following options can be used as Additional Paragraphs defining the length of time that the 
Participant has to notify the Contractor of exercising the exclusive right: 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-14 12-10-2016 
 
 
OPTION 1: 
The Participant has the option for ___  (insert a time period of not less than 6 months) 
after Contractor Subject Invention is disclosed to the Participant to choose an exclusive 
license in Contractor’s Subject Inventions in the field of use of______________ (insert 
the field of use negotiated between the Parties). 
OPTION 2: 
During the term of this CRADA and for a period of 6 months after the termination or 
completion of the CRADA, the Participant shall have the opportunity, pursuant to 15 
U.S.C. 3710a, to obtain a license to Contractor’s Subject Inventions. In particular, the 
Participant shall have the option to obtain, up to and including, an exclusive license to 
Contractor’s Subject Inventions within a defined field of use on agreed-upon 
reasonable terms and conditions, including the payment of negotiated license fees and 
royalties. 
OPTION 3: 
In Annex ___, the Parties have negotiated greater rights in the Contractors Subject 
Inventions pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 3710a.  
OPTION 4: 
The Participant has the option for ___ (insert a time period) plus a period of not more 
than 6 months after completion or termination of this CRADA to choose an exclusive 
license in Contractor’s Subject Inventions in the field of use of______________(insert the 
field of use negotiated between the Parties). 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE: Background Intellectual Property 
Usually, a list of the Background Intellectual Property (BIP) is attached to the CRADA as 
an Annex and referenced in the definition for BIP. This provides an easy way to amend the 
list as the CRADA progresses and also might be protectable under FOIA. Since the notice of 
existing BIP is to inform the Participant of existing technology that might need to be 
licensed to practice Subject Inventions, the language below can be modified such that only 
the Contractor is required to provide a list of BIP. The Parties can add the following 
paragraph to reference the Annex and remove the annex reference in the definition: 
Each Party may use the other Party’s Background Intellectual Property identified in 
Annex ___ of this CRADA solely in performance of research under the Statement of 
Work. This CRADA does not grant to either Party any option, grant, or license to 
commercialize, or otherwise use the other Party’s Background Intellectual Property. 
Licensing of Background Intellectual Property, if agreed to by the Parties, shall be 
the subject of separate licensing agreements between the Parties. 
Each Party has used reasonable efforts to list all relevant Background Intellectual 
Property, but Background Intellectual Property may exist that is not identified. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-15 
 
 
Neither Party shall be liable to the other Party because of failure to list Background 
Intellectual Property. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
The CRADA must include an article which sets forth the allocation of rights to Subject 
Inventions between the parties. Through a class waiver at each laboratory, DOE has 
provided the Participant with title to inventions made by employees of the Participant. These 
class waivers extended the March-In Rights to Participant’s Subject Inventions. The terms 
and conditions of that waiver have been effectively changed by P.L. 104-113 (the National 
Technology Transfer Act of 1995, hereinafter in this guidance, the "ACT") to include a field 
of use license granted to the Participant in Subject Inventions made in whole or in part by 
the contractor and the Government license and march-in rights contained in the ACT. The 
article must indicate that DOE retains rights for Subject Inventions for which a party to the 
CRADA does not file patent applications or maintain patents. The article must also provide 
that the Government retains a nonexclusive, nontransferable, irrevocable, paid-up license to 
practice or to have practiced for or on behalf of the United States every Subject Invention 
under the CRADA throughout the world. (Authority: 35 U.S.C. 202(c)(2) for DOE’s 
nonprofit management and operating contractors entering into CRADAs and by DOE policy 
for other management and operating contractors and CRADA Participants.) 
It is a statutory requirement that the Participant be offered an exclusive license in 
Contractor’s Subject Inventions. This should be documented in the preamble or by using 
one of the options above. This may be used in conjunction with other language allocating 
invention rights where the Contractor retains title to its inventions. In some cases a 
Participant may not want the CRADA to include the option to choose the field of use 
license. To ensure that it is documented that the statutorily required option has been offered 
in those cases, it is suggested that a pre-agreement notice or other correspondence with a 
potential Participant provide a notice to the Participant about the option. In this situation, the 
Contractor should include an acknowledgment of the notice in the CRADA. 
In addition, Subcontractors to the Contractor may be required to offer the Participant an 
exclusive license in their Subject Inventions pursuant to exceptional circumstances, such as 
in 37 C.F.R. 401.3. Similarly, where the subcontract is not funded with Federal funds and 
the subcontractor receives title to Subject Inventions under a patent waiver pursuant to 10 
C.F.R. 784, the waiver of patent rights may be conditioned on granting such option to the 
Participant.  
The exclusive license itself, per the ACT, may be only in exchange for reasonable 
compensation, when appropriate, and subject only to reasonable terms and conditions 
associated with obtaining reasonable compensation, for example, minimum annual royalty 
payments, objective performance obligations, contributions to the costs of prosecution and 
litigation to maintain a patent and other commercially reasonable terms, shall satisfy the 
statutory requirement of "for reasonable compensation." Failure of the Participant to fulfill 
any of its obligations in the negotiated exclusive license is cause for termination of such 
license and not in violation of the ACT. Although these are the types of terms that may be 
reasonable in appropriate circumstances, DOE does not require that any or all of these terms 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-16 12-10-2016 
 
 
be a condition of the license in all circumstances. Additionally, the exclusive license may be 
limited to a negotiated field of use. In accordance with the ACT, the license must provide 
the Participant with the right of enforcement under Chapter 29 of Title 35 U.S.C. 
The Contractor should document the terms of the option and whether the option was 
exercised or not. 
Paragraph G requires future reporting of use of intellectual property, which would most 
likely be commercialization of patents. The Participant should recognize that the 
Department has a need to measure economic outcomes of CRADAs and the Department 
through the Contractor may request long-term economic data (e.g., the results of 
commercializing products, processes, or services based on the CRADA, compliance with 
US Competitiveness provision of Article VIII). Such follow-up surveys are already being 
done for R&D 100 award-winning technologies without intruding into sensitive market or 
financial information. Measurement of the outcomes of cooperative research, both for the 
Department and for the Participant, is a very important aspect of the Department’s 
Technology Partnerships activity. Examples of the types of long-term economic data that 
could be sought include jobs created/lost/retained, increases in market share, and sales 
increases. Surveys would be done in such a way that answers are provided in broad 
categories (i.e., 1-50 jobs created, etc.) in a "check-the-box" approach. Mechanisms used to 
gather the information could include customer surveys, third-party personal interviews, and 
third-party studies commissioned by the Department. The Department has decided on 5 year 
period since implementation of the intellectual property developed under the CRADA may 
take several years and the impact of such use may not be realized until 5 years has passed. 
However, this period may be reduced with DOE Contracting Officer approval where the 
Participant openly demonstrates why a shorter time is more appropriate based on the 
research being performed under the CRADA. Likewise, the Contracting Officer may 
increase the period in cases where a DOE programmatic need arises. 
ARTICLE VII: RIGHTS IN DATA 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: For Paragraph A:  
A. The Parties and the Government shall have unlimited rights in all Generated 
Information produced or provided by a Party under this CRADA, except for 
information which is: (a) disclosed in a Subject Invention disclosure being 
considered for patent protection, (b) protected as a mask work or (c) marked as 
being copyrighted or as Protected CRADA Information or as Proprietary 
Information. 
PROPRIETARY INFORMATION:  
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: for Paragraph B. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-17 
 
 
OPTION 1: 
B. PROPRIETARY INFORMATION: Each Party agrees not to disclose 
Proprietary Information provided by the other Party to anyone other than the 
CRADA Participant and Contractor without written approval of the providing 
Party, except to Government employees who are subject to 18 U.S.C. 1905. 
To the extent that any Generated Information discloses or duplicates 
Proprietary Information, such Generated Information shall be marked and 
treated as Proprietary Information. 
Disclosures of Proprietary Information to DOE employees shall occur only 
on site at the Contractor’s facilities unless mutually agreed upon by the 
Parties. The Contractor and DOE shall limit their respective internal 
disclosure of Proprietary Information to those employees or agents having a 
need to know such information 
OPTION 2: 
B. PROPRIETARY INFORMATION: All information marked as Proprietary 
Information shall be protected by the recipient as Proprietary Information for 
a period of _____ years from receipt of such Proprietary Information when 
clearly dated, otherwise from the effective date of this CRADA, unless, as 
shown by the recipient, such Proprietary Information becomes publicly known 
without the fault of the recipient, comes into recipient’s possession from a 
third party without an obligation of confidentiality on the recipient, is 
independently developed by recipient’s employees who did not have access to 
such Proprietary Information, is released by the disclosing Party to a third 
party without restriction, or is released for disclosure with the written consent 
of the disclosing Party. 
OPTION 3: No Proprietary Information.  
If the Parties agree that no Proprietary Information will be shared between the Parties in 
order to perform the tasks in the Statement of Work, the following language could be 
used. However, the following clause can be replaced by amending the CRADA if the 
Parties decide to share proprietary information during the performance of the project: 
B. PROPRIETARY INFORMATION: The Parties agree that no Proprietary 
Information will be shared between the Parties.  
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPHS:  
Any of following additional paragraphs can be added to Paragraph B of the Article:  
(11)  Proprietary Information in tangible form shall be returned to the 
disclosing Party or destroyed with a certificate of destruction 
submitted to the disclosing Party upon termination or expiration of this 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-18 12-10-2016 
 
 
CRADA, or during the term of this CRADA upon request by the 
disclosing Party. 
(12)  All Proprietary Information shall be returned to the provider thereof at 
the conclusion of this CRADA at the provider’s expense. 
(13)  In no case shall the Contractor provide Proprietary Information of the 
Participant to any person or entity for commercial purposes, unless 
otherwise agreed to in writing by the Participant. 
(14)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph B, both Parties agree 
that a subcontractor identified in the Statement of Work may receive 
Proprietary Information to the extent necessary to perform the 
activities assigned to the subcontractor as set forth in the Statement of 
Work provided that the subcontractor agrees in writing to comply with 
the requirements set forth in this Article. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE REGARDING PROPRIETARY INFORMATION: 
The definition in Article I (complying with the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) 
and Stevenson-Wydler statute (15 U.S.C. 3710 a(c)(7)(A)), clearly indicates that Proprietary 
Information is "information embodying trade secrets developed outside the CRADA at 
private expense." The contractor cannot negotiate away the right of a Government 
employee, subject to 18 U.S.C. 1905, to see Proprietary Information. The contractor should 
seek additional rights to Proprietary Information at the DOE laboratory where program 
needs require rights greater than those prescribed in the CRADA clauses (e.g., including 
limiting the period in which Proprietary Information is maintained as proprietary when such 
information is retained by the contractor). Such disclosure to the Government may require 
marking with both Proprietary Information and OUO as required under DOE O 471.3, 
Identifying and Protecting Official Use Only Information.  
The obligations of the parties with regard to Proprietary Information should require that all 
such materials be sufficiently identified and marked so that the personnel involved in the 
project will have no trouble understanding what materials are to be protected. The parties 
should stipulate whether the contractor will return such materials, destroy them, or keep 
them at the end of work on the CRADA. If information could not be protected as a valid 
trade secret, or commercial or financial information, it should not be protected under the 
CRADA. 
If the parties will be using software, biological materials, specimen materials, equipment, or 
other tangible personal property which a party wants to protect as proprietary, such items 
should be included in the definition of Proprietary Information to ensure such protection. 
Additional materials can be found at 48 CFR 927.400. In certain projects, a separate 
Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) or software license may be appropriate to protect the 
parties and define the use of such items. Reference to the existence of such MTA or license 
may be appropriate within the CRADA or Statement of Work.  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-19 
 
 
The Parties may wish to return Proprietary Information before the conclusion of the 
CRADA, when such information is no longer needed for CRADA work. 
The Parties may want to address situations in which Proprietary Information is in electronic 
form and cannot necessarily be returned to the providing Party or completely destroyed 
without incurring considerable expenses. For example, electronic communications such as 
emails are often stored in backup files, tapes, or otherwise be part of a party’s permanent 
business records. The Parties may agree to exempt these types of files or tapes. 
PROTECTED CRADA INFORMATION  
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Fundamental Research under Export Control Law  
Some University M&O Contractors have many foreign employees and students and comply 
with export control law through the fundamental research safe-harbor. Also, Part 734.8(c) of 
the Export Administration Regulation extends the "fundamental research" designation to 
FFRDCs (Federally Funded Research and Development Centers) and the language below 
regarding "higher education" can be appropriately modified. In either case, the Participant 
may want to protect its own data. Therefore, the first paragraph of this subsection in the 
DOE Model CRADA could be replaced with the following paragraph where only the 
Participant’s generated information is marked: 
Except where a Participant’s funding agreement prohibits such protection, the 
Participant may designate and mark as Protected CRADA Information any 
Generated Information produced by its employees, which meets the definition in 
Article I. Because the Contractor is part of an institution of higher education and 
intends to conduct its activities as fundamental research under the U.S. Export 
Administration Regulations, the Contractor does not intend to mark any of its 
Generated Information as Protected CRADA Information. All such designated 
Protected CRADA Information shall be appropriately marked. 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Last subparagraph of this Paragraph C could be replaced with 
the following: 
The obligations of this paragraph shall end sooner for any Protected CRADA 
Information which shall become publicly known without fault of either Party, 
shall be independently developed outside of the CRADA by a Party’s employees 
who did not have access to the Protected CRADA Information, or is disclosed 
through a product released by the Participant. If recipient receives any 
information independently developed by a third party without any obligation of 
confidentiality which is similar to Protected CRADA Information, disclosure by 
recipient of such third party information shall not be a breach of this CRADA. 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Subcontractor’s Data 
If some of the CRADA is done by subcontractors, the following changes can be made:  
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-20 12-10-2016 
 
 
The following definitions should be added to Article I: 
"Subcontractor" means a subcontractor of the Contractor or Participant at any tier. 
The following paragraph should be added to the Rights in Data Article: 
Each Party may designate and mark as Protected CRADA Information any 
Generated Information produced by its employees or Subcontractors, which meets 
the definition in Article I and, with the agreement of the other Party, so designate 
any Generated Information produced by the other Party’s employees or 
Subcontractors which meets the definition in Article I. All such designated Protected 
CRADA Information shall be appropriately marked. 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE: Other Protected Data Category. The definition for Other 
Protected Data must be added to Article I when this provision is used in the CRADA. 
OTHER PROTECTED DATA: The Participant may designate data delivered to the 
Contractor by the Participant as Other Protected Data provided the data meets the 
definition of Article I and the data is marked in accordance with the award, contract, 
or other agreement that provides for the protection of the data. The Contractor shall 
comply with the markings to the extent that the markings are authorized by the 
award, contract, other agreement, or statutory authority. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE REGARDING PROTECTED CRADA INFORMATION: 
The wording of the definition for Protected CRADA Information should be along the lines 
of the Stevenson-Wydler statute (15 U.S.C. 3710a(c)(7)(B)) and placed in the Definitions 
article to support the substantive clause on protecting this information. The CRADA must 
include a requirement that designated Protected CRADA Information be appropriately 
marked. The Contractor cannot negotiate away the right to share Protected CRADA 
Information with Government employees covered under 18 U.S.C. 1905. Also, the 
Contractor cannot negotiate away DOE’s right to share Protected CRADA Information with 
other DOE facilities having the same protection in place without the approval of the DOE 
field element office responsible for the CRADA. Such disclosure to the Government or 
other DOE facilities may require marking with both Protected CRADA Information and 
OUO as required under DOE O 471.3, Identifying and Protecting Official Use Only 
Information. Any delivery to DOE of Protected CRADA Information will be to implement 
the following policy: (a) ensure that anticipated DOE mission benefit is received from 
CRADAs; (b) avoid duplication of expense and effort; (c) help to advance technology; and 
(d) enable DOE to meet statutory requirements to disseminate information after the 
expiration of the withholding period.  
Software may be marked as Protected CRADA Information, but that restriction only applies 
to the source code. Software has been exempted from the requirement of getting approval 
from the Contracting Officer to share with other GOGOs and/or M&O Contractors. The new 
software copyright provision (see below) requires deposit of CRADA generated software in 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-21 
 
 
OSTI/ESTSC and therefore the object code can be shared under the Government’s copyright 
license.  
The parties should negotiate the respective responsibilities for marking Generated 
Information that meets the definition of Protected CRADA Information and the obligations 
that will attach to such information. Generated Information that is marked Protected 
CRADA Information cannot be protected for more than the statutory maximum of 5 years 
from the date it is produced. The determination as to which Generated Information is to be 
marked as Protected CRADA Information shall be made when the Generated Information is 
produced, not at the end of the CRADA. Also, if the Participant is using Federal funds to 
perform at least some of the work, the terms of that Federal funding agreement with regard 
to protection of data should apply (i.e., the time period in the Federal funding agreement is 
the maximum allowed to mark information as Protected CRADA Information) even if such 
protections under the CRADA could be greater than the terms of the Federal funding. The 
parties shall embody the rights and obligations in an appropriate legend. The parties should 
negotiate the term for which it will be protected and the obligations of the parties with 
regard to such Protected CRADA Information. The Contractor may license its Protected 
CRADA Information as long as it doesn’t violate the release restrictions set forth in this 
article. If no protection is needed or when protection is no longer permitted, the parties 
should quickly publish the Generated Information when possible. 
Per DOE Directive DOE O 241.1B, Generated Information in the form of final reports or 
other scientific and technical information (STI) that is marked as Protected CRADA 
Information and final reports or STI for which no protection is needed should be submitted 
to DOE’s Office of Scientific and Technical Information.  
The parties should also be careful to appropriately mark as Protected CRADA Information 
in human-readable form onto all physical media and in digitally encoded form in all 
machine-readable information. 
COPYRIGHTS 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: The first paragraph containing the rights of the Parties with 
regards to copyright can be replaced with the following: 
Each Party shall have the first option to assert copyright in works authored by its 
employees. Copyrights in co-authored works by employees of the Parties shall be 
held jointly, and use by either Party shall be without accounting. A Party electing not 
to assert copyright in a work authored by its employees agrees to assign such 
copyright to the other Party upon the request of, and at the expense of, the other 
Party. 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Technical Manual, Film and Digital Media 
The first paragraph could be replaced with the following if the Parties intend the 
copyrighted work to be contained within a Technical Manual, book, film, digital media, etc. 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-22 12-10-2016 
 
 
However, the rights of the Parties could be defined in this paragraph instead of using an 
Annex.  
All Participant and Contractor copyrights to original information for which 
authorship takes place during the performance of work under this CRADA shall be 
owned and licensed as set forth in Annex ___ subject to any obligation of protection 
as required in this article. 
COMPUTER SOFTWARE: If the CRADA will develop Computer Software, then the 
computer software definition should be added to Article I and paragraph (D) replaced in its 
entirety as follows: 
In Article I, add a definition for Computer Software as follows: 
"Computer Software" means (i) computer programs that comprise a series of 
instructions, rules, routines, or statements, regardless of the media in which 
recorded, that allow or cause a computer to perform a specific operation or series of 
operations; and (ii) recorded information comprising source code listings, design 
details, algorithms, processes, flow charts, formulas, and related material that would 
enable the computer program to be produced, created, or compiled.  
In the Rights in Data Article, replace the entire section (D) COPYRIGHT with the 
following:  
(D) COPYRIGHT: The Parties may assert Copyright in any of their Generated 
Information. Assertion of Copyright generally means to enforce or give an indication 
of an intent or right to enforce such as by marking or securing Federal registration. 
Copyrights in co-authored works by employees of the Parties shall be held jointly, 
and use by either Party shall be without accounting. 
COMPUTER SOFTWARE: For all Computer Software produced in the performance 
of this CRADA, the Parties shall provide an Announcement Notice, AN 241.4 
Software Announcement Notice, along with providing the source code, the executable 
object code and the minimum support documentation needed by a competent user to 
understand and use the Computer Software to DOE’s Energy Science and 
Technology Software Center (ESTSC) via www.osti.gov/estsc. The source code of the 
Computer Software may be marked as Protected CRADA Information in accordance 
with this Article; however, the Government’s use of the executable object code is 
governed by the applicable license below. 
[The Parties can negotiate ownership and license rights to software and other 
copyrighted generated data developed under this CRADA.] 
COMMENT: Many Laboratories may want to negotiate license rights in a 
separate agreement because use of software under a license will extend 
beyond the completion of the CRADA. The Laboratory should ensure that if 
there is an exclusive license to the Participant, that there is a right to license to 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-23 
 
 
third parties similar to march-in rights when Participant isn’t commercializing 
the Laboratory’s software. Therefore the Laboratory may want to use the 
following suggested statement: 
Under a separate agreement, the Contractor will grant the Participant a 
license in Contractor’s Computer Software. If the grant is for an exclusive 
license, the separate agreement will include "march-in rights." 
For Generated Information that is Copyrighted Computer Software produced by a 
Party, the Party shall inform DOE’s ESTSC when it abandons or no longer 
commercializes the Copyrighted Computer Software. Until such notice to ESTSC, the 
Government has for itself and others acting on its behalf, a royalty-free, 
nontransferable, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide copyright license to 
reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform publicly and display publicly, by 
or on behalf of the Government. (narrow license) After the Party owning the 
Copyrighted Computer Software abandons or no longer commercializes the 
Copyrighted Computer Software, the Government has for itself and others acting on 
its behalf, a royalty-free, nontransferable, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide 
copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the 
public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the 
Government. (broad license) 
For all other Generated Information where a Party asserts copyright in 
copyrightable works produced in the performance of this CRADA, the Government 
has for itself and others acting on its behalf, a royalty-free, nontransferable, 
nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide copyright license to reproduce, prepare 
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display 
publicly, by or on behalf of the Government, subject to the restrictions this Article 
places on publication of Proprietary Information and Protected CRADA Information.  
The Parties agree to place Copyright and other notices, as appropriate for the 
protection of Copyright, in human-readable form onto all physical media, and in 
digitally encoded form in the header of machine-readable information recorded on 
such media such that the notice will appear in human-readable form when the digital 
data are off loaded or the data are accessed for display or printout. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE REGARDING COPYRIGHT: 
DOE authorizes the Participant and the contractor to assert copyright in Generated 
Information. The parties must grant to the United States an irrevocable, paid-up copyright 
license to any and all works that come out of the project and may be copyrightable.  
For Computer Software, the Government retains a narrow license (without the right to 
distribute copies to the public) that will become a broad license after the Participant decides 
to abandon or not commercialize the software. However, there may be circumstances where 
DOE Program may require the broad license only (or Open Source Software distribution) 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-24 12-10-2016 
 
 
for programmatic reasons and the above double underlined language will need to be 
appropriately modified by DOE Patent Counsel. The Contractor shall follow section 
(e)(1)(i) of M&O Contract clause 970.5227-24 Rights in Data-Technology Transfer 
(formally DEAR 970.5227-2) that allows "the Contractor to copyright data first produced 
under a CRADA…as described in the individual CRADA." Therefore, no DOE Program 
approval is necessary and only reporting requirements to Patent Counsel and ESTSC apply. The 
Contractor shall follow its M&O Contract clauses regarding abandoning the commercialization 
of any software generated under the CRADA. The parties may also negotiate reciprocal 
licenses among themselves. As an alternative, the parties can agree as part of the CRADA to 
negotiate the software license rights each party is to receive upon the production and 
copyright of software under the CRADA. The contractor must ensure that all copyrighted 
works are available to other DOE contractors for Governmental purposes. Except for 
computer software, any restriction on the Government and others acting by or on behalf of 
the Government of the right to prepare derivative works or the right to use any copyrighted 
Generated Information must also be approved by the Contracting Officer of the cognizant 
DOE field element with concurrence by DOE Patent Counsel. All Computer Software, 
whether copyrighted or not, must be deposited in ESTSC. The Parties may mark Computer 
Software as Protected CRADA Information (PCI); however, that protection extends only to 
the source code. The Government retains a narrow license in the object code to be used for 
Government purposes. When the PCI protection expires (if applicable), the Government can 
use the source code under the narrow license.   
Copies of all Participant generated computer software on which copyright protection will be 
asserted must be delivered to the ESTSC by the Participant. If the contractor and Participant 
agree to protect computer software for 5 years by marking it as Protected CRADA 
Information, the applicability of the DOE march-in rights will most likely be delayed for 
such period unless there is a clear indication that the Participant refuses to commercialize 
the computer software generated by the Contractor under the CRADA in which the 
Participant has an exclusive license. Most likely, an exclusive license of Contractor’s 
software would be covered under a separate agreement and should include march-in rights 
where the Participant is required to commercialize or the Contractor may license to third 
parties. The Participant should be given a right of appeal this march-in right. If the 
Participant is only granted a non-exclusive license in Contractor’s computer software, then 
the Contractor may license the software non-exclusively to third parties.  
ARTICLE VIII: U.S. COMPETITIVENESS 
OPTION 1: Use of a DOE approved Net Benefit Statement (NBS). 
As discussed below in the general guidance section, when approved by DOE a Net Benefit 
Statement may be used in lieu of the standard U.S. competitiveness language in paragraph 
A. The NBS may be incorporated through a modification of the standard U.S. 
competitiveness language in paragraph A or by replacing paragraph A in its entirety with the 
following or similar statement.  
A. A plan for providing net benefit to the U.S. economy is attached in Annex 
_____. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-25 
 
 
OPTION 2: Substitution of "Subject Invention" for "Intellectual Property." 
Subject to DOE approval, the requirements set forth at paragraph A may be limited to Subject 
Inventions. When approved, "Intellectual Property" in paragraph A should be replaced with "a 
Subject Invention."   
When requesting DOE approval, the Contractor should explain the type of Intellectual Property 
anticipated to be developed under the CRADA and any relevant information that would help 
DOE determine the impact of the request. The use of this option is likely appropriate when it 
would harmonize the CRADA terms with the terms of a related funding agreement. The use of 
this option may be appropriate when subject inventions and non-invention IP are anticipated to 
be generated. The use of this option is unlikely to be approved when no subject inventions are 
anticipated because no benefit would be provided to the U.S. economy and industrial 
competitiveness. When no subject inventions are anticipated and the Participant has concerns 
with the standard U.S. competitiveness language, the Participant should pursue a NBS rather 
than this option.  
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: If the Participant wants the option to submit a NBS in 
the future, the following paragraph can be added. 
If the Participant is willing to commit to paragraph A, but would like the option to submit a 
NBS after considering the impact of commercializing the Intellectual Property developed 
under the CRADA, this language may be added as an additional paragraph C:  
C. If the Participant later finds that it cannot meet the requirements of 
Paragraph A above, the Participant will submit a plan for providing net 
benefit to the US economy to DOE. If such plan is approved by DOE, it shall 
be incorporated into this CRADA by an amendment to be executed by the 
Parties. If the CRADA is completed or terminated and DOE approves of the 
plan, the DOE Contracting Officer shall issue an approval letter.  
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
DOE has invested billions of dollars in the capabilities and resources at DOE laboratories. 
To increase the return on the taxpayers’ investment, the Government seeks to transfer 
technology to companies with significant manufacturing and research facilities in the United 
States to provide short- and long-term benefits to the U.S. economy and the industrial 
competitiveness of such companies. Therefore, in selection of CRADA Participants, it is 
DOE’s long established policy to give preference to business units located in the United 
States which agree to substantially manufacture resulting technology in the United States. 
For more information on DOE’s policy on U.S. competitiveness, see the Memorandum dated 
February 10, 1993 from the Director of Technology Utilization and the Memorandum dated 
March 17, 2011 from the Secretary of Energy.  
The CRADA must include the standard U.S. competitiveness language in paragraph A or 
one of the two options above. The preference is to use the standard U.S. competitiveness 
language in paragraph A that requires any products embodying any Intellectual Property 
resulting from the performance of the CRADA be manufactured substantially in the United 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-26 12-10-2016 
 
 
States. Therefore, the standard U.S. competiveness language in paragraph A must be the 
laboratories’ opening negotiating position for all CRADAs unless an approved Class NBS 
applies to the transaction 
Where a CRADA Participant is unable or unwilling to agree to the standard U.S. 
Competitiveness language in paragraph A, the Contractor may request a Net Benefit Statement 
(NBS). If approved, the NBS can replace or modify the standard U.S. competitiveness language 
in paragraph A. The NBS identifies specific contractual commitments made by the Participant to 
benefit the U.S. economy and industrial competitiveness. The process for negotiating and approval 
the use a NBS is the following: 
(1) During CRADA negotiations, Participant and Contractor should review the 
standard U.S. competitiveness language in paragraph A. If Participant 
agrees to the standard U.S. competitiveness language in paragraph A, then 
the language should be included in the CRADA. 
(2) If the Participant is unable or unwilling to agree to the standard language, 
the Contractor should determine whether a class NBS applies. Class NBSs 
are discussed further below. If Participant agrees to the class NBS, then the 
class NBS should be included in the CRADA. When the CRADA is 
forwarded for review and approval to the cognizant DOE Patent Counsel or 
the designated DOE Field Office personnel responsible for technology transfer 
matters (hereinafter, the Reviewing Office), the Contractor must inform the 
Reviewing Office of the use of the class NBS and demonstrate that the use of 
the class NBS is appropriate.  
(3) If no class NBS applies or the Participant will not agree to the class NBS, then 
the Contractor should provide the Participant with a U.S. Competitiveness 
Questionnaire (See Attachment 8) or other form that has been approved by 
DOE. Once the Questionnaire is completed, the Contractor or the Participant 
should submit it to the Reviewing Office. The completed Questionnaire contains 
a proposed NBS and information that will help DOE review the adequacy of the 
proposed NBS. 
(4) The Reviewing Office will review the proposed NBS to determine whether it 
contains specific contractual commitments by the Participant to benefit the U.S. 
economy and industrial competitiveness. If it does not or additional information 
is necessary, the Reviewing Office will work with the Participant, directly or 
through the Contractor, depending on the preference of the Participant, to 
address any issues with the proposed NBS.  
(5) Once the proposed NBS is considered legally sufficient by the Reviewing 
Office, the Reviewing Office will present the proposed NBS, along with any 
other documents deemed necessary, to the appropriate DOE program 
organization.  
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-27 
 
 
(6) If the DOE program organization accepts the NBS, the Reviewing Office will 
so inform the Contractor and the Contractor will incorporate the NBS into the 
CRADA for DOE approval. If the DOE program organization requires changes 
to the NBS, the Reviewing Office will communicate those changes to the 
Participant. If the Participant accepts those changes, the NBS will be finalized 
and incorporated into the CRADA. The Reviewing Office will continue 
working with the DOE program organization and the Participant through 
subsequent revisions, if necessary, to reach a mutually agreeable NBS. The 
Reviewing Office will make best efforts to act upon the NBS (and subsequent 
revisions) within 5 working days of receipt. If a DOE program organization 
finds that a NBS is unacceptable after negotiation, the parties may seek 
resolution from the Cognizant Secretarial Officer.  
Special Circumstance: 100% funds-in CRADAs 
The DOE program organization may consider the funding structure as a formal, yet non-
determinative, factor when evaluating the sufficiency of the NBS. If a Participant wishes to have 
the DOE program organization consider the NBS in light of the funding structure of a 100% 
funds-in CRADA, the Contractor must submit written confirmation to the Reviewing Office that 
the Participant was informed of the full range of funds-in partnership options available at the 
Laboratory and the IP disposition for each option. This confirmation may take the form of the 
certification used for Agreements to Commercialize Technology (ACT), or another form of 
written confirmation agreed to by the Laboratory and the Reviewing Office. When confirmed, 
the Reviewing Office will inform the DOE program organization that the CRADA is 100% 
funds-in and that the funding structure can be considered when evaluating the NBS.  
Class Net Benefits Statements 
Occasions may arise where similarly situated participants may benefit by accepting the terms of 
a class NBS. DOE may implement class NBSs that may cover multiple participants at multiple 
Laboratories. Class NBSs may be drafted either upon request of one or more Laboratories or 
participants, or at DOE’s own initiative. Class NBSs may be drafted to cover participants in a 
particular program, for example the Lab-Embedded Entrepreneurship Program, or certain 
technologies, such as those within a particular DOE Technology Office. Class NBSs should 
further DOE programmatic goals, for instance, by providing incentives for broad participation in 
a DOE program in which participants engage the Laboratories via CRADAs. Participants must 
be defined, must meet certain eligibility requirements, and must acknowledge acceptance of the 
class NBS in writing (email is sufficient). Participants that do not accept the terms of the NBS 
are free to negotiate individual NBSs, however, the participants should be informed that such 
negotiations will likely delay finalization of the CRADA.  
The Assistant General Counsel for Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property will coordinate 
the drafting of class NBSs with the appropriate DOE program organization. A class NBS may be 
one or more commitments listed in paragraph A in lieu of the standard U.S. competitiveness 
language, an attachment to the CRADA, or incorporated throughout the CRADA by 
modifications made to other Articles of CRADA, such as in the International Basic Science 
CRADA. Each class NBS must be approved by the Assistant General Counsel for Technology 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-28 12-10-2016 
 
 
Transfer and Intellectual Property and concurred by the Director of the cognizant DOE program 
organization. Further, the Cognizant Secretarial Officer must concur if the NBS covers more 
than one DOE program organization or if the Assistant General Counsel for Technology Transfer 
and Intellectual Property deems such concurrence necessary. DOE Patent Counsel in the field 
offices may assist with drafting and negotiating class NBSs and will disseminate final class 
NBSs to affected Laboratories. 
The Secretary empowered the General Counsel to prepare guidance on streamlining the NBS 
process. To that end, the General Counsel may issue further guidance updating or supplementing 
the foregoing procedure.  
When CRADAs involve foreign entities, additional factors must be addressed. Under 
Executive Order 12591, when considering whether to enter into a CRADA with a foreign 
company, and after reference to information from the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), 
appropriate consideration must be given to (1) whether the foreign company and/or its 
government permit and encourage U.S. entities to enter into similar agreements on a 
comparable basis; (2) whether the foreign government has policies to protect Intellectual 
Property rights; and (3) when the research will involve or produce technologies subject to 
U.S. national security export controls, whether the foreign government has adequate 
measures to protect the transfer of the technology to prohibited locations. Consideration of 
the first factor is also required under 15 U.S.C. 3710a(c)(4)(B). Also, if the funds come from 
some other part of the Department, extra care must be taken to ensure that U.S. 
Competitiveness is handled in a manner consistent with such Department funding. For 
example, if a DOE Cooperative Agreement to the CRADA Participant has unique U.S. 
Competitiveness provision, the CRADA with the Participant should reference such 
provision. Similarly if the project is occurring under an International Agreement or Treaty, 
the U.S. Competitiveness provision should be consistent with such International Agreement 
or Treaty. 
ARTICLE IX : EXPORT CONTROL  
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Classified Information.  
The following approved language was developed to address foreign ownership, control, or 
influence issues with respect to the Participant. It should only be used for those CRADAs 
involving access to classified information, access to special nuclear materials, or unescorted 
access to security areas of Departmental facilities. If the CRADA involves access to 
classified information, access to special nuclear materials, or unescorted access to security 
areas of Departmental facilities, the requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended, must be met, this article of the CRADA should be retitled "Export 
Control/Foreign Ownership and Control," and language pertaining to FOCI should be added 
along with the Definitions for Foreign Interests and FOCI. The completed FOCI 
questionnaire attached hereto as Attachment 7 must be completed by the Participant and 
included as an annex to the CRADA. 
The Participant has a continuing obligation to provide the Contractor written notice 
of any changes in the nature and extent of foreign ownership, control, or influence 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-29 
 
 
over the Participant which would affect the Participant’s answers to the previously 
completed FOCI certification. 
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Some University M&O Contractors have many foreign 
employees and students. They strictly limit data developed onsite to be technology that 
would meet Department of Commerce’s Export Administration Regulations (EAR) Section 
99 designation. As such, it would be considered fundamental research and there would be no 
restrictions on its publications. The following language may be used: 
The parties understand that materials and information resulting from the 
performance of this CRADA may be subject to export control laws and that each 
party is responsible for its own compliance with such laws. 
Participant acknowledges that the Contractor has many foreign employees and 
students. The Participant agrees that the Contractor will conduct this project as 
fundamental research with no restrictions on publication. Accordingly, the 
Contractor does not intend to mark any of its Generated Information as Protected 
CRADA Information and the Participant agrees not to direct the Contractor to create 
export controlled information and not to transfer to Principal Investigator or to other 
employees or students of the Contractor any Proprietary Information or Protected 
CRADA Information that is export controlled under the Export Administration 
Regulations, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations, or 10 CFR 810. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
There must be an export control warning statement to warn the parties that material and 
information resulting from the CRADA may be export controlled. This statement should be 
conspicuous, like the Uniform Commercial Code-like disclaimer. 
ARTICLE X:  REPORTS AND PUBLICATIONS  
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Paragraph B-- a more detailed review process for 
approving publications can be used: 
The Parties anticipate that their employees may wish to publish technical developments 
and/or research findings generated in the course of this CRADA. On the other hand, the 
Parties recognize that an objective of this CRADA is to provide business advantages to 
the Participant. In order to reconcile publication and business concerns, the Parties 
agree to a review proposed public disclosures as follows: 
1. Each Party ("Submitter") shall submit to the other Party ("Recipient"), in 
advance, proposed written and oral publications pertaining to work under the 
CRADA. Proposed oral publications shall be submitted to the Recipient in the 
form of a written presentation synopsis and a written abstract. 
2. The Recipient shall provide a written response to the Submitter within 30 days, 
either objecting or not objecting to the proposed publication. The Submitter shall 
consider all objections of the Recipient and shall not unreasonably refuse to 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-30 12-10-2016 
 
 
incorporate the suggestions and meet the objections of the Recipient. The 
proposed publication shall be deemed not objectionable, unless the proposed 
publication contains the Recipient’s Proprietary Information, Protected CRADA 
Information, export controlled information for which the Submitter does not have 
an appropriate license or exclusion from U.S. export control laws, or material 
that would create potential statutory bars to filing the United States or 
corresponding foreign Patent applications. In the event an objection is raised 
because of a potential statutory bar, the Recipient shall file its patent application 
within _____ days of making such objection, after which time the Submitter is 
free to publish. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
The CRADA must include a provision setting forth the required minimum deliverables of a 
publically releasable abstract and final report. Other deliverables pertaining to the specific 
project are normally contained in the Statement of Work; however, some intellectual 
property might be useful to the Government or the public and should be delivered to the 
DOE Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) for distribution if DOE requests 
such delivery. CRADA reports should fully cover and describe the research done under the 
CRADA, incorporating technical data as needed to support conclusions, and including 
Protected CRADA Information as appropriate. Where the Participant and/or the contractor 
identifies that such reports contain Protected CRADA Information, the reports will be 
properly marked with a restrictive legend identifying the agreed-to period of withholding 
from public disclosure per DOE Directive DOE O 241.1B. Such reports shall be furnished 
to OSTI for Departmental use only and be withholdable for the stated withholding period as 
materials exempt from Subchapter II of Chapter 5 of Title 5, United States Code. The 
contractor must ensure that adequate deliverables are provided to OSTI to ensure that the 
results of DOE-approved CRADAs are made known to other DOE contractors for DOE 
program needs. Additional information on providing information to OSTI is available at 
www.osti.gov/stip. Information and suggested best practices on marking CRADA reports to 
identify the agreed-to period of withholding from public disclosure is available at 
www.osti.gov/stip/access/crada.  
A publication review provision must be included in the CRADA. The pre-publication 
review process must consider the protection of rights to filing U.S. and foreign patent 
applications, since any disclosure may be a bar to filing. 
ARTICLE XI: FORCE MAJEURE 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
A force majeure clause stating that neither party will be liable for unforeseeable events 
beyond its reasonable control must be included in the CRADA.  
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-31 
 
 
ARTICLE XII: DISPUTES 
If the Parties want to include a more detailed description of resolving disputes, the following 
options could be used as additional paragraphs added to the standard paragraph: 
OPTION 1: Mediation 
After the Parties have consulted with the Technology Partnership Ombudsman in 
accordance with the paragraph above, the Parties can initiate mediation, which shall 
commence within 30 days of selection of the mediator and shall be held in a mutually 
convenient location. The mediator’s role shall be to facilitate an agreement between 
the Parties, based on their mutual interests. The Parties agree to share the costs of 
mediation equally. 
Neither Party will be prevented from resorting to a judicial proceeding if (1) good 
faith efforts to resolve the dispute have been unsuccessful or (2) interim relief from a 
court is necessary to prevent serious injury. To the extent that there is no applicable 
U.S. Federal law, this CRADA and performance thereunder shall be governed by the 
law of the State of_____. 
OPTION 2: DOE Contracting Officer Determination 
After the Parties have consulted with the Technology Partnership Ombudsman in 
accordance with the paragraph above, the Parties can have the dispute decided by 
the DOE Contracting Officer, who shall reduce his/her decision to writing within 60 
days of receiving in writing the request for a decision by either Party to this CRADA. 
The DOE Contracting Officer shall mail or otherwise furnish a copy of the decision 
to the Parties. The decision of the DOE Contracting Officer is final unless, within 
120 days, the Participant brings an action for adjudication in a court of competent 
jurisdiction in the State of________. To the extent that there is no applicable U.S. 
Federal law, this CRADA and performance thereunder shall be governed by the law 
of the State of ________. 
OPTION 3: Arbitration 
After the Parties have consulted with the Technology Partnership Ombudsman in 
accordance with the paragraph above and have mutually agreed not to enter into 
mediation, the Parties can request to have the dispute settled by arbitration 
conducted in the State of _________________ in accordance with the then current 
and applicable rules of the American Arbitration Association. Judgment upon the 
award rendered by the Arbitrator(s) shall be nonbinding on the Parties. 
OPTION 4: Litigation 
After the Parties have consulted with the Technology Partnership Ombudsman in 
accordance with the paragraph above and are unable to jointly resolve the dispute, 
the Parties can seek resolution through a judicial proceeding. Neither Party will be 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-32 12-10-2016 
 
 
prevented from resorting to a judicial proceeding if (1) good faith efforts to resolve 
the dispute have been unsuccessful or (2) interim relief from a court is necessary to 
prevent serious injury. To the extent that there is no applicable U.S. Federal law, this 
CRADA and performance thereunder shall be governed by the law of the State of 
_______. Any and all litigation involving disputes, claims, or either Party’s rights 
and duties under or arising as a result of this CRADA shall be brought in a court of 
competent jurisdiction in the State of _________. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
The standard Disputes clause in the agreement must be included in all CRADAs. DOE 
believes that contacting the Laboratory Technology Partnership Ombudsman is essential in 
resolving disputes quickly and efficiently. If the Technology Partnership Ombudsman is 
unsuccessful in assisting the parties in resolving the conflict, the parties should attempt to 
settle disputes by mediation or by DOE Contracting Officer before entering into binding or 
nonbinding arbitration and/or seeking adjudication in a court of competent jurisdiction. It is 
strongly recommended that the contractor seek to include an intermediate step after it 
attempts to directly resolve the dispute with the Participant before going to court. 
If mediation is undertaken, it is recommended that the confidentiality provisions of the 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act be incorporated into the agreement to mediate. Sample 
agreements are available from the DOE Office of Conflict Prevention and Resolution. If the 
parties decide to replace mediation with another form of Alternative Dispute Resolution, 
such as a neutral evaluation or mini-trial, the DOE Office of Conflict Prevention and 
Resolution can provide information and guidance on these processes. 
It is DOE policy (See DOE General Counsel Issues Arbitration Guidance for M&O 
Contractors) that mediation is the principal method of alternate dispute resolution. However, 
there is currently no legal prohibition on M&O contractors including binding arbitration 
clauses in their contracts with others. It often will be a good idea to include arbitration 
clauses as a means of limiting the risk of litigation which is often more time consuming and 
expensive than arbitration. The Department of Energy, including NNSA, does however 
"regulate" the use of arbitration once a dispute has arisen under our Contractor Legal 
Management Requirements. However, agreement to arbitrate should generally be consistent 
with the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act and Department guidance. When a decision 
to arbitrate is made, a statement fixing the maximum award amount should be agreed to.  
ARTICLE XIII: ENTIRE CRADA, MODIFICATIONS, 
ADMINSTRATION AND TERMINATIONS  
ALTERNATE LANGUAGE: Administration 
The following paragraph could be used for paragraph C: 
The Contractor enters into this CRADA under the authority of its prime contract with 
DOE. The Contractor is authorized to and will administer this CRADA in all respects 
unless otherwise specifically provided for herein. Administration of this CRADA may 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-33 
 
 
be transferred from the Contractor to DOE or its designee as a successor to 
Contractor who is assuming responsibilities for the facilities managed by Contractor 
with notice of such transfer to the Participant, and the Contractor shall have no 
further responsibilities except for the confidentiality, use and/or nondisclosure 
obligations of this CRADA. This CRADA shall be binding upon and inure to the 
benefit of the Parties, and their respective successors and assignees. 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE: Surviving Clauses 
The following clause may be added to section D.  
The confidentiality, use, and/or non-disclosure obligations of this CRADA shall 
survive any termination of this CRADA, as well as provisions of this CRADA which 
would naturally survive termination or expiration of this CRADA. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
The CRADA must include an article stating that all the terms and conditions of the CRADA 
are entirely contained within the CRADA and its annexes (for example, Statement of Work). 
Subsequent modifications to the CRADA must acknowledge or supersede this statement. 
The CRADA should include a termination clause. The termination clause may also 
reference to Funding and Costs Article, in so far as to clearly state that "failure of the 
Participant to provide the necessary advance funding, or to promptly pay the invoices 
rendered by the contractor is cause for termination of the CRADA." 
When the contractor is entering into a CRADA with a division or subsidiary of another 
corporation, it may be desirable to add a statement to the signatory line of the Participant 
stating that the person attests that he/she has the legal authority to bind the company to all 
the terms and conditions of the CRADA. 
III. ADDITIONAL ARTICLES 
The following articles may be added depending on the scope of work and Contractor 
obligations: 
ARTICLE __: LABORATORY SITE ACCESS, SAFETY AND HEALTH 
As a precondition to performing work at CONTRACTOR Laboratory, Participant must complete 
all CONTRACTOR Site Access documents and requirements. Participant shall take all 
reasonable precautions in activities carried out under this Agreement to protect the safety and 
health of others and to protect the environment. Participant must comply with all applicable 
safety, health, access to information, security and environmental regulations and the 
requirements of the Department and CONTRACTOR, including the specific requirements of the 
Laboratory. In the event that the Participant fails to comply with said regulations and 
requirements, CONTRACTOR may, without prejudice to any other legal or contractual rights, 
issue an order stopping all or any part of Participant's activities at the Laboratory.  
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-34 12-10-2016 
 
 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
If the Participant or any subcontractors are going to perform work under the CRADA at the 
Laboratory, the Participant shall follow the Laboratory site access, safety and health 
protocols. Therefore, this article should be added accordingly.  
ARTICLE       : TRADEMARKS 
If trademarks are contemplated to be created under the CRADA, the following definitions 
should be added to Article I: 
"Trademark" means a distinctive mark, symbol, or emblem used in commerce by a 
producer or manufacturer to identify and distinguish its goods or services from those 
of others. 
"Service Mark" means a distinctive word, slogan, design, picture, symbol, or any 
combination thereof, used in commerce by a person to identify and distinguish its 
services from those of others. 
The following language may be used for this article. 
The Parties may seek to obtain Trademark/Service Mark protection on products or 
services generated under this CRADA in the United States or foreign countries. [The 
ownership and other rights relating to this Trademark shall be as mutually agreed to 
in writing by the Parties.] The Parties hereby acknowledge that the Government 
shall have the right to indicate on any similar goods or services produced by or for 
the Government that such goods or services were derived from and are a DOE 
version of the goods or services protected by such Trademark/ Service Mark, with the 
Trademark and the owner thereof being specifically identified. In addition, the 
Government shall have the right to use such Trademark/Service Mark in print or 
communications media 
OPTION:  
The following language is an option for the bracketed language in the above 
paragraph: 
The Party originating the Trademark/Service Mark on products or services 
generated under this CRADA in the United States or foreign countries shall 
have the full right, title, and interest in such Trademark or Service Mark 
subject only to the Government’s retained right to use the mark on any similar 
goods or services as set forth below. 
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-35 
 
 
OPTION:  
If the CRADA Participant objects to the Government’s retention of any right to use 
any trademark owned by the Participant because the Participant has no right to 
perform a quality review or inspection of the DOE version of the trademarked goods, 
the following sentence may be added to the end of the above standard language 
paragraph, if desired: 
Where the Government indicates on goods that such goods were derived from 
goods protected by a Trademark/Service Mark, the Government will also 
indicate that the Trademark owner has had no right to perform a quality 
review/inspection of the DOE version of the goods. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
By approving a CRADA, DOE authorizes the contractor and the Participant to assert 
trademark protection for products or services arising out of the performance of that 
CRADA. The parties shall acknowledge the Government’s right to indicate the relationship 
between the goods and services it produces and those protected by trademark/service mark 
in appropriate circumstances. The parties may negotiate between themselves any licensing 
rights they desire, consistent with the Government’s license. 
Trademarks for jointly developed products or services should be addressed in the CRADA. 
One way to do so is to specify that any trademarks in generated products or services jointly 
attributable to contractor and Participant employees shall be jointly owned by the contractor 
and the Participant. 
ARTICLE      : MASK WORKS 
If mask works are contemplated to be created under the CRADA, the following definition 
should be added to Article I: 
"Mask Work" means a series of related images, however fixed or encoded, having or 
representing the predetermined, three-dimensional pattern of metallic, insulating, or 
semiconductor material present or removed from the layers of a semiconductor chip 
product and in which series the relation of the images to one another is that each 
image has the pattern of the surface of one form of the semiconductor chip product. 
The following language may be used for this article. 
The Parties may seek to obtain legal protection for Mask Works fixed in 
semiconductor products generated under this agreement as provided by Chapter 9 of 
Title 17 of the United States Code. [The rights to any Mask Work covered by this 
provision shall be as mutually agreed to in writing by the Parties.] The Parties 
hereby acknowledge that the Government or others acting on its behalf shall retain a 
nonexclusive, paid-up, worldwide, irrevocable, nontransferable license to reproduce, 
import, or distribute the covered semiconductor product by or on behalf of the 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-36 12-10-2016 
 
 
Government, and to reproduce and use the Mask Work by or on behalf of the 
Government. 
OPTION:  
The following language is an option for the bracketed language in the above paragraph: 
The allocation of rights to Mask Works will be commensurate with the distribution of 
Copyrights under Article VII, paragraph D of this CRADA. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
By approving a CRADA, DOE authorizes the contractor and the Participant to assert mask 
work protection for semiconductor chip products first produced during the performance of 
the CRADA. The parties shall grant to the Government and others acting on its behalf an 
irrevocable, paid-up license to use any of these covered products. The parties may negotiate 
between themselves any licensing rights they desire, consistent with the Government’s 
license. 
Jointly developed semiconductor chip materials may be registered for protection; this should 
be addressed in the CRADA. One way to address this is to specify that any mask works 
fixed in semiconductor chip products generated under the CRADA and jointly attributable 
to contractor and Participant employees shall be jointly owned by the contractor and the 
Participant. 
ARTICLE      : ASSIGNMENT OF PERSONNEL 
If personnel from either party will work at the others facility, this Article may be added to 
the CRADA:  
D. Each Party may assign personnel to the other Party’s facility as part of this CRADA 
to participate in or observe the research to be performed under this CRADA. Such 
personnel assigned by the assigning Party shall not during the period of such 
assignments be considered employees of the receiving Party for any purpose. 
E. The receiving Party shall have the right to exercise routine administrative and 
technical supervisory control of the occupational activities of such personnel during 
the assignment period and shall have the right to approve the assignment of such 
personnel and/or to later request their removal by the assigning Party. 
F. The assigning Party shall bear any and all costs and expenses with regard to its 
personnel assigned to the receiving Party’s facilities under this CRADA. The 
receiving Party shall bear facility costs of such assignments. 
OPTION: More Complete Recitation of the Exclusions in Paragraph A 
G. Each Party may assign personnel to the other Party’s facility as part of this CRADA. 
Such personnel assigned by the assigning Party to participate in or observe the 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-37 
 
 
research to be performed under this CRADA shall not during the period of such 
assignments be considered employees of the receiving Party for any purposes, 
including but not limited to any requirements to provide workers’ compensation, 
liability insurance coverage, payment of salary or other benefits, or withholding of 
taxes. 
OPTION: More Complete and Explicit Recitation of Costs for Paragraph C 
C.  The assigning Party shall bear any and all costs and expenses with regard to its 
personnel assigned to the receiving Party’s facilities under this CRADA. The 
receiving Party shall bear the costs of providing an appropriate work space, access 
to a telephone, use of laboratory, manufacturing or other work areas as appropriate, 
and any other utilities and facilities related to such assignments. 
ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH: Observe Working Hours of Host Facility 
The assigning Party’s employees and agents shall observe the working hours, 
security and safety rules, and holiday schedule of the receiving Party while 
working on the receiving Party’s premises. The receiving Party shall have the 
reasonable right to approve the assignment of personnel or request their removal 
by the assigning Party. 
OPTION: Contractor Annex 
If Employees of the Participant are required to visit the Contractor’s facility, the 
Participant agrees to the conditions in Annex ____. 
 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
If it is anticipated that personnel may be assigned back and forth between the facilities, a 
provision for such assignments must be included in the CRADA so that such assignments 
of personnel can be easily facilitated during the course of the CRADA. The contractors 
should ensure that, when this article is being discussed, the Participants are given copies of 
contractor regulations, procedures, policies, and practices for entrance of outside personnel 
to work in the laboratories and/or facilities, especially where foreign Participants are 
involved. DOE facilities must comply with U.S. export and security laws when receiving 
assigned foreign national Participant personnel. 
ARTICLE __: NOTICES 
If Parties want Notices to be in the CRADA instead of the Statement of Work, this Article 
may be added: 
Any communications required by this CRADA, if given by postage prepaid first class 
U.S. Mail or other verifiable means addressed to the Party to receive the 
communication, shall be deemed made as of the day of receipt of such 
communication by the addressee, or on the date given if by verified facsimile. 
Address changes shall be made by written notice and shall be effective thereafter. All 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-38 12-10-2016 
 
 
such communications, to be considered effective, shall include the number of this 
CRADA.  
The addresses, telephone numbers, email and facsimile numbers for the Parties are 
as follows: 
1.  For CONTRACTOR: 
U.S. Mail Only:  FedEx, UPS, Freight 
a. FORMAL NOTICES AND COMMUNICATIONS, COPIES OF 
REPORTS 
Attn: Tel: 
Email:  
 
b. PROJECT MANAGER, REPORTS, COPIES OF FORMAL 
NOTICES AND COMMUNICATIONS 
Attn: Tel:  
Email:  
2.  For PARTICIPANT: 
U.S. Mail Only: FedEx  UPS, Freight 
a. FORMAL NOTICES AND COMMUNICATIONS, COPIES OF 
REPORTS 
 Attn: Tel: 
Email:  
b. PROJECT MANAGER, REPORTS, COPIES OF FORMAL 
NOTICES AND COMMUNICATIONS 
Attn: Tel: 
Email:  
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
If the Contractor does not want to have the notices in the Statement of Work, then delete 
paragraph B of Article II and add this Article to the CRADA for communications among the 
parties to the CRADA for invoicing and receipt of funds, as well as other notices under the 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 4 
12-10-2016 Page 4-39 
 
 
CRADA. For funds-in CRADAs a billing and/or an invoice address for the Participant can 
be added, if needed. 
ARTICLE __: PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
A. Each Party shall assign and identify in writing a project manager prior to the start of 
the CRADA. Either Party may change its project manager by providing written 
notification to the other Party. Each project manager shall be responsible for 
coordinating all matters relating to this CRADA, any Statement of Work hereunder, 
and all other related matters between the Parties. All communications between the 
Parties relating to this CRADA shall take place between the project managers. 
B. Project managers for this CRADA are as follows: 
for CONTRACTOR:__________________ 
for PARTICIPANT:__________________ 
The Parties will use reasonable efforts to manage the disclosure of Proprietary 
Information or Protected CRADA Information through the project managers or their 
designees; however, failure to do so will not cause any marked Proprietary 
Information or any marked Protected CRADA Information to lose the protection 
afforded by Articles VII and VIII. 
GENERAL GUIDANCE: 
This additional article has been approved for use if desired. This information could be 
combined with the NOTICES Article and be retitled as "Notices and Project Management." 
ARTICLE __: ORDER OF PRECEDENCE 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the annexes and those of this CRADA, 
this CRADA shall prevail. 
ARTICLE __: WAIVER 
The failure of the Contractor or the Participant at any time to enforce any provisions of this 
CRADA or to exercise any right or remedy shall not be construed to be a waiver of such 
provisions or of such right or remedy or of the right of the Contractor or the Participant 
thereafter to enforce each and every provision, right, or remedy. 
ARTICLE __: BACKGROUND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
Usually, a list of the Background Intellectual Property (BIP) is attached to the CRADA as 
an annex. However, the Parties could agree to add an Article to the CRADA as follows and 
this can be modified to have only the Contractor report its BIP: 
Attachment 4  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 4-40 12-10-2016 
 
 
The Contractor and the Participant have identified and agreed that the following 
Background Intellectual Property may be used in the performance of work under 
this CRADA and may be needed to practice the results of this CRADA: 
Contractor’s Background Intellectual Property:___________________   
Participant’s Background Intellectual Property:___________________  
The Contractor and the Participant represent that the above-identified Background 
Intellectual Property is available for licensing as of the effective date of this 
CRADA. 
Each Party has used reasonable efforts to list all relevant Background Intellectual 
Property, but Intellectual Property may exist that is not identified. Neither Party 
shall be liable to the other Party because of failure to list Background Intellectual 
Property.
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 5 
12-10-2016 Page 5-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 5 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
MODEL SHORT FORM CRADA 
This Model Short form CRADA is designed to be offered to entities as means for 
streamlining and simplifying the CRADA process for certain circumstances. In order to 
ensure expedited CRADA development and approval, this document must be adopted in its 
entirety, as written, by both/all parties with no exceptions. The language of this document is 
pre-approved by DOE; however, the DOE field office can approve minor changes specific 
to a Laboratory or other facility. The goal is for uniformity across the DOE complex with 
this CRADA with limited differences between Laboratories and other facilities.  
The Short Form CRADA may be offered to entities that meet the following criteria: 
H. The Participant should be clearly advised that this CRADA must be adopted in its 
entirety, as written, by both/all parties and, at the same time, advised of the 
alternative to use the DOE Model CRADA if the total terms of the Short Form 
CRADA are not agreeable. 
I. The dollar value of the entire project (including amendments) does not exceed 
$2,000,000. This dollar value may be periodically adjusted by the HQ Office of 
Procurement Policy (MA). 
The Short Form CRADA package will be subject to the same process used for DOE Model 
CRADA package review and approval at the cognizant DOE field element.  
Guidance for the DOE Model CRADA applies to clauses unchanged in the Short Form 
CRADA.  
For each project, a Statement of Work (SOW) is required that details the nature, scope, 
roles, responsibilities, and costs of activities to be conducted by both parties together with 
an estimated timeline for completion of identified tasks. The SOW will be incorporated into 
the CRADA as Annex A.  
Financial Considerations:  
J. Federal Administrative Charge is applicable to entities as provided for by DOE 
Order 522.1;  
K. In Article II paragraph D, DOE’s Cognizant Site CFO’s per Chapter XIII of the 
Financial Management Handbook will provide approval/concurrence before the 
DOE Contracting Officer approves any advance payments of less than 60 days; 
L. All of the funding provisions/requirements in Attachment 4 apply to the DOE Short 
Attachment 5  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 5-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
Form CRADA. Please see Attachment 4 for more guidance on the following 
provisions: 
(15)  Requirements for SBIR/STTR awards; 
(16)  Full funding requirements for awards that are $25,000 or less or where the 
work will be completed in 60 days or less; 
(17)  Additional funding requirement for termination costs or other expenses for 
individual projects as determined by the Field CFOs; 
(18)  Statement that no budgetary resources shall be utilized to fund work for 
CRADA partners; and 
(19)  Exceptions to funding requirements as provided for in Chapter 13 of DOE’s 
Financial Management Handbook. 
The Department of Energy has opted to utilize the following agreement, which is uniform 
across the Departmental facilities, for small value transactions. Except for minor 
modifications to the terms of this agreement made by CONTRACTOR, most changes will 
require approval by the DOE Contracting Officer, WHICH WILL LIKELY DELAY THE 
START DATE OF THE PROJECT. If substantive changes are required, the DOE Model 
CRADA may be more appropriate due to the increased flexibility such agreements afford.  
STEVENSON-WYDLER (15 USC 3710a) 
SHORT-FORM COOPERATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT 
(hereinafter "CRADA") NO. __________ 
BETWEEN 
___________________________ 
under its U.S. Department of Energy Contract 
No. . (Hereinafter "Contractor")  
AND 
______________________ (hereinafter "Participant") both 
being hereinafter jointly referred to as the "Parties" 
ARTICLE I: DEFINITIONS 
A. "Government" means the United States of America and agencies thereof. 
B. "DOE" means the Department of Energy, an agency of the United States of America. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 5 
12-10-2016 Page 5-3 
 
 
C. "Contracting Officer" means the DOE employee administering the Contractor’s DOE 
contract. 
D. "Generated Information" means information produced in the performance of this 
CRADA. 
E. "Proprietary Information" means information which is developed at private expense 
outside of this CRADA, is marked as Proprietary Information, and embodies (i) trade 
secrets or (ii) commercial or financial information which is considered privileged or 
confidential under the Freedom of Information Act (5 USC 552 (b)(4)). 
F. "Protected CRADA Information" means Generated Information which is marked as being 
Protected CRADA Information by a Party to this CRADA and which would have been 
Proprietary Information had it been obtained from a non-federal entity. 
G. "Subject Invention" means any invention of the Contractor or Participant conceived of or 
first actually reduced to practice in the performance of work under this CRADA. 
H. "Intellectual Property" means patents, trademarks, copyrights, mask works, Protected 
CRADA Information and other forms of comparable property rights protected by Federal 
law and other foreign counterparts. 
ARTICLE II: STATEMENT OF WORK, TERM, FUNDING AND COSTS 
A. Annex A is the Statement of Work. 
B. The effective date of this CRADA shall be the latter date of (1) the date on which it is 
signed by the last of the Parties or (2) the date on which it is approved by DOE. The 
work to be performed under this CRADA shall be completed within _____ months/years 
from the effective date.  
C. The Participant's estimated contribution is $   , which includes $     
funds-in. The Government's estimated contribution, which is provided through 
Contractor’s contract with DOE, is $   , subject to available funding. 
D. [Reserve paragraph if Participant is not providing funding to Contractor.] For CRADAs 
that include (non-Federal) funding on a funds-in basis, the Participant shall provide 
Contractor, prior to any work from being performed, a budgetary resource sufficient 
to cover the anticipated work that will be performed during the first billing cycle. In 
addition, the Participant shall provide 60 days of additional funding to ensure that 
funds remain available for project during subsequent billing cycles. Failure of 
Participant to provide the necessary advance funding is cause for termination of this 
CRADA in accordance with the Termination article of this CRADA. A billing cycle is the 
period of time between billings, usually 30 days. The billing cycle is complete when 
the customer is billed for services rendered.  
  
Attachment 5  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 5-4 12-10-2016 
 
 
ARTICLE III: PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Any tangible personal property produced or acquired in conducting the work under this CRADA 
shall be owned by the Party paying for it. There will be no jointly funded property. Personal 
property shall be disposed of as directed by the owner at the owner's expense. 
ARTICLE IV: DISCLAIMER: 
THE GOVERNMENT, THE PARTICIPANT, AND THE CONTRACTOR MAKE NO EXPRESS 
OR IMPLIED WARRANTY AS TO THE CONDITIONS OF THE RESEARCH OR ANY 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, GENERATED INFORMATION, OR PRODUCT MADE OR 
DEVELOPED UNDER THIS CRADA, OR THE OWNERSHIP, MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH OR RESULTING PRODUCT. 
NEITHER THE GOVERNMENT, THE PARTICIPANT, NOR THE CONTRACTOR SHALL BE 
LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, CONSEQUENTIAL OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES.  
ARTICLE V: PRODUCT LIABILITY 
Except for any liability resulting from any negligent acts, or willful misconduct or omissions of 
Contractor or Government, Participant agrees to hold harmless the Government and the 
Contractor for all damages, cost and expenses, including attorney’s fees, arising from personal 
injury or property damage as a result of the making, using, or selling of a product, process or 
service by or on behalf of the Participant, its assignees or licensees, which was derived from the 
work performed under this CRADA.  
ARTICLE VI: RIGHTS TO SUBJECT INVENTIONS 
The Parties agree to promptly disclose in writing to each other every Subject Invention in 
sufficient detail to comply with the provisions of 35 USC §112 well before any statutory bars 
may arise under 35 USC §102. Each Party shall have the first option to retain title to any of its 
Subject Inventions. If a Party elects not to retain title to any of its Subject Inventions, then the 
other Party shall have the option of electing to retain title to such Subject Inventions under this 
CRADA. The Participant has the option to choose an exclusive license, for reasonable 
compensation, in a pre-negotiated field of use to the Contractor’s Subject Inventions. 
The Parties acknowledge that the DOE may obtain title to each Subject Invention reported under 
this Article for which a patent application is not filed, a patent application is not prosecuted to 
issuance, or any issued patent is not maintained by either Party to this CRADA. The Government 
shall retain a nonexclusive, non-transferable, irrevocable, paid-up license to practice, or to have 
practiced, for or on its behalf all Subject Inventions throughout the world.  
For Subject Inventions conceived or first actually reduced to practice under this CRADA which 
are joint Subject Inventions made by the Contractor and the Participant, title to such Subject 
Inventions shall be jointly owned by the Contractor and the Participant. 
The Parties acknowledge that the DOE has certain march-in rights to any Subject Inventions in 
accordance with 48 CFR 27.304-1(g) and 15 USC 3710a(b)(1)(B) and (C). 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 5 
12-10-2016 Page 5-5 
 
 
ARTICLE VII: RIGHTS IN DATA 
A. The Parties and the Government shall have unlimited rights and each of them shall have 
a right to use all Generated Information produced by, or information provided to, the 
Parties under this CRADA which is not marked as being Protected CRADA Information 
or Proprietary Information.  
B. Proprietary Information: 
Each Party agrees to not disclose properly marked Proprietary Information provided by 
the other Party to anyone other than the providing Party without the written approval of 
the providing Party, except to Government employees who are subject to 18 USC 1905.  
C. Protected CRADA Information: 
Each Party may designate and mark as Protected CRADA Information (PCI) any 
qualifying Generated Information produced by its employees. For a period of ___ years 
[not to exceed five years] from the date it is produced, the Parties agree not to further 
disclose such PCI except as necessary to perform this CRADA or as requested by the 
DOE Contracting Officer to be provided to other DOE facilities for use only at those 
DOE facilities with the same protection in place and marked accordingly. Government 
employees who are subject to 18 USC 1905 may have access to PCI. 
D. Cessation of Obligations Regarding PCI and Proprietary Information: 
The obligations relating to the disclosure or dissemination of Protected CRADA 
Information and Proprietary Information shall end if any such information becomes 
known without fault of either party, or if such information is developed independently by 
a Party’s employees who had no access to the PCI or Proprietary Information.  
E. Copyright: 
The Parties may assert copyright in any of their Generated Information. The Parties 
hereby acknowledge that the Government or others acting on its behalf shall retain a 
nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, irrevocable, non-transferable license to 
reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly 
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government, all copyrightable works 
produced in the performance of this CRADA, subject to the restrictions this CRADA 
places on publication of Proprietary Information and Protected CRADA Information. 
[This paragraph can be deleted if no software is produced] If a Party copyrights 
computer software produced in the performance of this CRADA, the Party will provide 
the source code, object code, and expanded abstract, and the minimum support 
documentation needed by a competent user to understand and use the software to DOE's 
Energy Science and Technology Software Center (ESTSC) via www.osti.gov/estsc. The 
Party shall inform ESTSC when it abandons or no longer commercializes the 
computer software. Until such notice to ESTSC, the Government has for itself and 
others acting on its behalf, a royalty-free, nontransferable, nonexclusive, irrevocable 
Attachment 5  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 5-6 12-10-2016 
 
 
worldwide copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform 
publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government. (narrow license) 
After the Party owning the Computer Software abandons or no longer 
commercializes the Computer Software, the Government has for itself and others 
acting on its behalf, a royalty-free, nontransferable, nonexclusive, irrevocable 
worldwide copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute 
copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the 
Government. (broad license) 
ARTICLE VIII: U.S. COMPETITIVENESS 
The Parties agree that a purpose of this CRADA is to provide substantial benefit to the U.S. 
economy. 
A. In exchange for the benefits received under this CRADA, the Participant therefore 
agrees to the following: 
(20)  Products embodying Intellectual Property developed under this CRADA shall 
be substantially manufactured in the United States, and 
(21)  Processes, services, and improvements thereof which are covered by 
Intellectual Property developed under this CRADA shall be incorporated into 
the Participant’s manufacturing facilities in the United States either prior to 
or simultaneously with implementation outside the United States. Such 
processes, services, and improvements, when implemented outside the United 
States, shall not result in reduction of the use of the same processes, services, 
or improvements in the United States. 
B. The Contractor agrees to a U.S. Industrial Competitiveness clause in accordance 
with its prime contract with respect to any licensing and assignments of its 
Intellectual Property arising from this CRADA, except that any licensing or 
assignment of its intellectual property rights to the Participant shall be in 
accordance with the terms of paragraph A of this Article. 
ARTICLE IX: EXPORT CONTROL 
EACH PARTY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ITS OWN COMPLIANCE WITH EXPORT CONTROL 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS. EXPORT LICENSES OR OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS FROM 
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT MAY BE REQUIRED FOR THE EXPORT OF GOODS, 
TECHNICAL DATA OR SERVICES UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. THE PARTIES 
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT EXPORT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS MAY CHANGE AND THAT 
THE EXPORT OF GOODS, TECHNICAL DATA OR SERVICES FROM THE U.S. WITHOUT 
AN EXPORT LICENSE OR OTHER APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORIZATION 
MAY RESULT IN CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
  
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 5 
12-10-2016 Page 5-7 
 
 
ARTICLE X: REPORTS AND ABSTRACTS 
The Parties agree to produce the following deliverables: an initial abstract suitable for public 
release; and a final report, to include a list of Subject Inventions. It is understood that the 
Contractor has the responsibility to provide this information at the time of its completion to the 
DOE Office of Scientific and Technical Information. The Participant agrees to provide the above 
information to the Contractor to enable full compliance with this Article.  
The Parties agree to submit, for a period of five years from the expiration of this CRADA and, 
upon request of DOE, a non-proprietary report no more frequently than annually on the efforts 
to utilize any Intellectual Property arising under the CRADA. 
Use of the name of a Party or its employees in any promotional activity, with reference to this 
CRADA, requires written approval of the other Party. 
ARTICLE XI: FORCE MAJEURE 
Neither Party will be liable for unforeseeable events beyond its reasonable control. 
ARTICLE XII: DISPUTES 
The Parties shall attempt to jointly resolve all disputes arising from this CRADA. In the 
event a dispute arises under this CRADA, the Participant is encouraged to contact 
Contractor’s Technology Partnership Ombudsman in order to further resolve such dispute 
before pursuing third- party mediation or other remedies. If the Parties are unable to jointly 
resolve a dispute within a reasonable period of time, they agree to submit the dispute to a 
third-party mediation process that is mutually agreed upon by the Parties. To the extent that 
there is no applicable U.S. Federal law, this CRADA and performance thereunder shall be 
governed by the laws of the State of _________, without reference to that state’s conflict of 
laws provisions. 
ARTICLE XIII: ENTIRE CRADA, MODIFICATIONS AND 
TERMINATION 
This CRADA with its annexes contains the entire agreement between the Parties in performing 
the research described in the Statement of Work (Annex A) and becomes effective on the later 
date of either the date the last Party signs the document or receipt of advance funding, if any. 
Any agreement to materially change any terms or conditions of the CRADA and annexes shall be 
valid only if the change is made in writing, executed by the Parties hereto, and approved by 
DOE. 
This CRADA may be terminated by either Party with ______ days written notice to the other 
Party. If Article II provides for advance funding, this CRADA may also be terminated by the 
Contractor in the event of failure by the Participant to provide the necessary advance 
funding. Each Party will be responsible for its own costs arising out of or as a result of this 
termination. The obligations of any clause of this CRADA that were intended to survive the 
Attachment 5  DOE O 483.1B 
Page 5-8 12-10-2016 
 
 
expiration of the period of performance, for example, confidentiality, use and/or non-disclosure 
obligations, shall also survive any termination of this CRADA. 
FOR CONTRACTOR:    FOR PARTICIPANT: 
BY____________________________  BY ________________________ 
TITLE_________________________  TITLE_____________________ 
DATE__________________________  DATE______________________ 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 6 
12-10-2016 Page 6-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 6 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
JOINT WORK STATEMENT FORMAT 
JWS/CRADA #_______ 
Project Title:__________________ 
Submittal Date:________________ 
A.  Data Table 
1. Summary/OSTI Abstract: 
2. Participant(s) Name and Address 
(NAME)  
(Mailing or Street Address) (City, State, Zip)  
(Telephone Number)  
3. Participant Type (check all that apply) 
 Participant One Participant Two 
Foreign ⁭ ⁭ 
University ⁭ ⁭ 
Small Business ⁭ ⁭ 
Large Business ⁭ ⁭ 
State or Local Government ⁭ ⁭ 
Not-for-Profit ⁭ ⁭ 
National Laboratory ⁭ ⁭ 
  
Attachment 6 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 6-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
4. Funding Table 
 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 
Total
s 
Funding 
Type Funds-in *In-kind Funds-in *In-kind Funds-in *In-kind 
Participant 1        
Participant 2        
 Dept. of  
 Energy 
    
Totals     
**FAC     
*Note: If applicable, the contractor has reviewed the Participant(s) proposed 
in-kind contribution and based on __experience, __ financial analysis, and/or 
___sound business judgment has determined the estimated in-kind 
contribution(s) is/are reasonable. 
**Federal Administrative Charge—state amount if included in Funds-in amount 
above. If FAC is waived, put amount in parentheses. See DOE Order 522.1 for 
more information on FAC.  
5. Identify the DOE mission area (__ Energy, __ Environmental Quality, __ 
Science, __ National Security, __ Other) that will benefit from this CRADA. If 
other, please explain. 
6. How does the proposed CRADA benefit DOE, Participant, and U.S. Taxpayer? 
(Some facilities require textual explanation; others provide a checklist for each 
stakeholder. An example follows.) 
EXAMPLE: 
DOE Benefit: ___ Assists laboratory in achieving programmatic scope, 
___adds new capability to the laboratory’s core competencies, ____ enhances 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 6 
12-10-2016 Page 6-3 
 
 
the laboratory’s core competencies, ___ uses the laboratory’s core 
competencies, and/or ____ enhances U.S. competitiveness by utilizing DOE-
developed intellectual property and/or capabilities. 
7.  DOE Program Manager: 
Telephone No. 
8. B&R Code and/or FWP Number 
9. The Proposed CRADA will be based upon [  ]DOE Model CRADA, ⁭  [  ]Short 
Form CRADA, [   ] Multilab CRADA, [  ] other (identify) 
B. Special Considerations 
1. If the proposed CRADA is with a foreign entity from a Country of Risk, is that 
CRADA in an area identified as restricted in the current Science and Technology 
(S&T) Risk Matrix? 
[  ] Yes  [   ] No.  If yes, answer question 2. 
2. Did the cognizant Under Secretary approve an exemption request for the proposed 
CRADA? 
[  ] Yes  [   ] No.  If no, the proposed CRADA shall not proceed. 
3. Background Intellectual Property (e.g., inventions or copyrightable software, 
etc.)? 
[  ] Yes  [   ] No.  If yes, list: 
4. Is the Participant interested in licensing Background Intellectual Property?  
[  ] Yes  [   ] No.  If yes, please identify any known impediments for such 
licensing: 
5. Are human or animal subjects involved in this project?   
[  ] Yes  [   ] No   
(If yes, before the CRADA can be executed, approvals must be obtained from the 
Institutional Review Board or the Animal Care and Use Committee.) 
6. Have all necessary environmental, safety, health and quality (NEPA) reviews 
been satisfactorily completed?  
[  ] Yes  [   ] No  (If No, explain) 
7. The laboratory is responsible for obtaining Conflict of Interest (COI) Certificates 
and will maintain in the file the completed COI Certificates for each employee 
with a substantial role in this CRADA. Are there any organizational or personal 
conflict of interest issues associated with this CRADA?  
[  ] Yes (If Yes, explain) ⁭[  ] No 
Attachment 6 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 6-4 12-10-2016 
 
 
8. Will export controlled and classified information be used or produced?  
[  ] Yes (If Yes, explain) ⁭[  ] No 
9. How was Fairness of Opportunity determined? __ Participant approached 
laboratory ___Participant responded to FBO (Federal Business Opportunity) 
___Participant was contacted by laboratory after or during broad public 
announcement.  
(Supporting documentation is to be maintained in CRADA file.) 
10. For 100% funds-in CRADAs, the Participant has been notified of other types of 
technology transfer agreements (e.g. Work for Others).   
[  ] Yes  [  ] No  [ ] N/A 
11. Did the Participant require any substantive/material changes to the 
laboratory/field-approved DOE Model CRADA and/or any changes to double-
underlined language?     
[  ] Yes   [   ] No   
If yes, attach copies of the proposed modified articles (changes should be 
highlighted in CRADA if it is also submitted with the JWS), and (if applicable) 
Participant’s U.S. Competitiveness worksheet/justification. If requested by the 
Contracting Officer, the Contractor will provide justification for modified articles 
in writing. 
12. Is this a request for a preliminary determination to proceed at Contractor’s own 
risk?  
[  ] Yes    [  ]  No.   
By checking yes, the Contractor certifies that the CRADA to be submitted for 
DOE approval contains terms and conditions previously approved by DOE with 
no deviations. 
13. Additional Notes: If applicable, identify special considerations or comments. 
If applicable, add approval signature blocks for DOE and the Contractor. 
 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 7 
12-10-2016 Page 7-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 7 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
CRADA WITH FOREIGN-OWNED OR CONTROLLED ENTITY 
Part A below is to be completed by proposed Participants in technology transfer agreements 
involving Participant access to classified information or special nuclear materials or 
unescorted access to security areas of Departmental facilities. This information is requested 
in accordance with provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.  Part B of 
this Attachment is to be completed by the Laboratory for notifying DOE.   
DOE field elements are required to include a foreign ownership, control, or influence 
(FOCI) review as part of their security review of CRADAs involving Participant access to 
classified information, access to special nuclear materials (special nuclear materials shall 
mean quantities as defined in 10 CFR Part 710) or unescorted access to security areas within 
Departmental facilities. If a CRADA does not involve access to classified information, 
special nuclear materials, or secure facilities, a FOCI review is not required to meet the 
Department’s national security obligations as mandated by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 
as amended.  If an individual has the ability and/or opportunity to obtain access to classified 
information or matter by being in a place where such information or matter is accessible, 
and, if the security measures which are in force do not prevent the gaining of access to the 
classified information or matter, the FOCI review must be completed regardless of whether 
the CRADA involves classified matter or information 
In those cases requiring a FOCI review, DOE must receive the prospective Participant’s 
response to the eleven FOCI questions, including required additional information and the 
certification, prior to approval of the CRADA. These materials should be submitted as early 
as possible to the normal Joint Work Statement/CRADA contact at DOE, for referral to the 
Safeguards and Security point of contact so that the FOCI review process may be initiated 
expeditiously. If the field element receives a proposed Joint Work Statement prior to 
submission of the needed responses to the FOCI questions, or a proposed CRADA prior to 
completion of the FOCI review and resolution of outstanding issues, the field element must 
decide whether to return the Joint Work Statement or CRADA for further information or to 
disapprove it. In general, no CRADA involving access to classified information, access to 
special nuclear materials, or unescorted access to security areas of Departmental facilities 
will be approved until the FOCI review is complete and all FOCI issues are resolved. One 
option, available at field element discretion, is to phase the work in such a way that 
unclassified activities are initiated in an earlier phase than those requiring access to 
classified information, special nuclear materials, or security areas of Departmental facilities. 
Approval of unclassified phases of the work could precede the completion of the FOCI 
determination. Approval of phases of the work involving classified information, special 
nuclear materials, or unescorted access to security areas of Departmental facilities must 
await the FOCI determination and resolution of any FOCI issues. The field element may 
Attachment 7 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 7-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
require additional justification from Laboratory to address the risk associated with 
terminating a CRADA between phases. 
Implementation of the FOCI review should be done in a manner which ensures that DOE 
meets the statutory deadlines for processing Joint Work Statements and CRADAs. 
Information submitted by the Participant as required pursuant to the FOCI review shall be 
treated by the Laboratory and by DOE, to the extent permitted by law, as business or 
financial information submitted in confidence to be used solely for purposes of evaluating 
FOCI.  Nothing in this guidance relieves the obligation to address other considerations such 
as export control or U.S. competitiveness issues. Broad concerns about existing U.S. 
competitiveness policies and procedures should be brought to the DOE Technology Transfer 
Committee for discussion. 
For CRADAs involving access to classified information or special nuclear materials or 
unescorted access to security areas of Departmental facilities, the CRADA must contain 
provisions which ensure that changes in the Participant’s FOCI status are promptly reported 
over the term of the agreement. If a Participant reports such changes or if more than 5 years 
have passed since any previous FOCI determination, the Laboratory shall forward that 
information to DOE according to its established procedures for FOCI review. Certain 
changes in the FOCI status of the Participant in an approved CRADA could result in 
direction from security organizations that access of the Participant to classified information, 
special nuclear materials, or security areas of Departmental facilities be limited.  The 
authority to limit access is inherent in operative DOE Orders. If the Participant becomes 
subject to FOCI and cannot, or chooses not to, avoid or mitigate the FOCI problem, and the 
Participant’s access to classified information is essential to continuation of the collaborative 
work, the Laboratory shall provide notice of termination and expedite the orderly shutdown 
of collaborative work.   
A. FOCI QUESTIONNAIRE FOR APPLICABLE 
COOPERATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
Instructions: 
I. For the purposes of this questionnaire, a foreign interest is defined as any of the 
following: 
A. A foreign government or foreign government agency; 
B. Any form of business enterprise organized under the laws of any country 
other than the United States or its possessions; 
C. Any form of business enterprise organized or incorporated under the laws of 
the U.S., or a State or other jurisdiction within the U.S., which is owned, 
controlled, or influenced by a foreign government, agency, firm, corporation 
or person; or 
D. Any person who is not a U.S. citizen. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 7 
12-10-2016 Page 7-3 
 
 
II. If your organization has not previously submitted responses to the following 
questions, then provide the information requested herein. Answer each question in 
either the yes or no space. If the answer to any of the questions is yes, provide the 
detailed information requested in the attached Guidelines for Completing the FOCI 
Certification for that specific question.  Information which responds to these 
questions and which has been previously submitted to a Government agency may be 
resubmitted for this questionnaire if the information is accurate, complete, and 
current. 
III.  If you own other entities, you must provide consolidated information for all your 
wholly- and majority-owned subsidiaries (foreign and domestic). If you are owned 
by a parent organization, it must also complete a FOCI certification which should be 
submitted along with your certification. 
IV.  Each FOCI representation must also include the following supporting information: 
A. Identification of all your organization’s owners, officers, directors and 
executive personnel, including their names; social security numbers; 
citizenship; titles of all positions they hold within your organization; and 
clearances they possess, if any, and the name of the agency(ies) which granted 
the clearances. 
B. Your organization’s latest annual report and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission Form 10-K. If you are a privately held company or a subsidiary 
of another corporation and cannot provide these documents, the appropriate 
official within your organization (e.g., chief financial officer, treasurer, or 
secretary) must provide the following consolidated financial information for 
all wholly and majority-owned subsidiaries and affiliates: assets, current and 
total; liabilities, current and total; stockholders’ equity; revenue and net 
income; and the amount of revenue derived from foreign interests. 
V. The certification of the FOCI questionnaire must be signed by an individual who can 
legally do so for the Participant and may include an owner, officer, or director. 
QUESTIONS: 
1. Does a foreign interest own or have beneficial ownership in 5% or more of your 
organization’s voting securities? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
2. Does your organization own 10% or more of any foreign interest? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
Attachment 7 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 7-4 12-10-2016 
 
 
3. Do any foreign interests have management positions such as directors, officers, or 
executive personnel in your organization? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
4. Does any foreign interest control or influence, or is any foreign interest in a position 
to control or influence the election, appointment, or tenure of any of your directors, 
officers, or executive personnel? 
5. Does your organization have any contracts, binding agreements, understandings, or 
arrangements with a foreign interest(s) that cumulatively represent 10% or more of 
your organization’s gross income? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
6. Is your organization indebted to foreign interests? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
7. Does your organization derive any income from sensitive countries included on the 
attached list? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
8. Is 5% or more of any class of your organization’s securities held in "Nominee shares," 
in "street names," or in some other method which does not disclose beneficial 
ownership of equitable title? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
9. Does your organization have interlocking directors with foreign interests? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
10. Are there any citizens of foreign countries employed by, or who may visit, your 
offices or facilities in a capacity which may permit them to have access to classified 
information or a significant quantity of special nuclear material? 
_____ Yes _____ No 
11. Does your organization have foreign involvement not otherwise covered in your 
answers to the above questions? 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 7 
12-10-2016 Page 7-5 
 
 
CERTIFICATION: Check one: 
( ) I certify that the entries made herein are accurate, complete, and current to the best of 
my knowledge and belief and are made in good faith. 
( ) I certify that the information requested herein has been previously submitted to the 
Department of Energy as required for a facility clearance and that the information in 
the previous submission is accurate, complete, and current for the purposes of th is 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement. 
CERTIFIED BY: 
      : NAME OF PARTICIPANT REPRESENTATIVE 
      : TITLE 
     :  STREET ADDRESS 
     :  CITY, STATE, ZIPCODE, COUNTRY 
     : SIGNATURE & DATE 
GUIDANCE FOR COMPLETING FOCI CERTIFICATION 
Question Number 1. Does a foreign interest own or have beneficial ownership in 5% or 
more of your organization’s voting securities? 
Identify the percentage of any class of shares or other securities issued which are owned by 
foreign interests, listed by country. If you answered "Yes" and have received from an 
investor a copy of Schedule 13D or Schedule 13G filed by the investor with the Securities 
and Exchange Commission, you are to attach a copy of Schedule 13D or Schedule 13G. 
Question Number 2. Does your organization own 10% or more of any foreign interest? 
If your answer is "Yes", furnish the name of the foreign interest, address by country, and the 
percentage owned. For each employee occupying a position with the foreign firm, provide 
the following information: 
1. Complete name. 
2. Citizenship. 
3. Titles of positions within the foreign entity. 
4. Clearances, if any, they possess, and by whom those clearances were granted. 
5. To what extent the employees are involved in the operations of the foreign facilities. 
Attachment 7 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 7-6 12-10-2016 
 
 
6. Whether or not any of these individuals will, by virtue of their position, knowledge, 
or expertise, require access to Department of Energy classified information. 
If the employees possess DOE clearances, or are in the process of being cleared, and hold 
positions with foreign interests, they need to complete the attached "Representative of 
Foreign Interest Statement" for each such firm. 
Does your organization have branch or sales offices or other facilities, or are you qualified 
to do business as a foreign corporation in any other countries? If the answer is "Yes" list all. 
What percentage of your organization’s gross income is derived from your foreign 
subsidiaries or affiliates? 
Question Number 3. Do any foreign interests have management positions such as directors, 
officers, or executive personnel in your organization? 
Furnish details concerning the identity of the foreign interest and the position(s) held in your 
organization, to include the amount of time the individual spends at your facility. If the 
individual spends less than full time at your facility, provide information on how and where 
the rest of his/her time is spent. 
Question Number 4. Does any foreign interest control or influence, or is any foreign interest 
in a position to control or influence the election, appointment, or tenure of any of your 
directors, officers, or executive personnel? 
Identify the foreign interest(s) and furnish details concerning the control or influence. If the 
individuals have been excluded from access to Department of Energy classified information 
by Board resolution or corporate exclusion, an official (signed and dated) copy of such 
exclusion must be submitted with this package. 
Question Number 5. Does your organization have any contracts, binding agreements, 
understandings, or arrangements with a foreign interest(s) that cumulatively represent 10% 
or more of your organization’s gross income? 
Furnish the name of the foreign interest, country, and nature of agreement or involvement. If 
there is no ownership involved in these arrangements, provide details along the same lines 
of information required for Question Number 2. Certification should be made as to whether 
or not the agreements are: 
1. Purely commercial in nature. 
2. Involve defense procurement. 
3. Involve classified information. 
4. Involve sensitive countries. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 7 
12-10-2016 Page 7-7 
 
 
Provide the amount of revenue derived from foreign sources. This should be provided by 
country. Also, state the time frame, e.g., fiscal year ending December 31, 1992, during 
which the revenue was derived. This should include revenue from all foreign sources, e.g., 
subsidiaries, equity income derived from your interest in less than wholly owned 
subsidiaries, export sales, divestitures to foreign interests, royalties from licensing and 
patent agreements, dividends from foreign stock holdings, and investment or real estate. 
Compliance with export license requirements and international traffic in arms regulations 
(ITAR) requirements must be acknowledged, if applicable. 
In addition, due to the political sensitivity of some countries, the Department of Energy 
requires that you provide the following information if you derive revenue and have other 
understandings or arrangements with sensitive countries: 
1. The amount of international and export revenue. 
2. The type of service or product provided (be specific—show whether they are 
commercial in nature or involve defense procurement). 
3. Compliance with export license and ITAR requirements, if applicable. 
4. Any other involvement not covered by the prior two elements of the question. 
NOTE: Information provided must be audited information, and NOT MORE THAN ONE 
YEAR OLD. 
Question Number 6. Is your organization indebted to foreign interests? 
Report all lines of credit your organization has with foreign interests even if there is no 
current  indebtedness. Provide the following information: 
1. The amount and type of indebtedness. 
2. If any debentures are convertible, explain under what circumstances. 
3. The name(s) of the lending institution(s) and the country(ies) in which they are 
located. 
4. What collateral, if any, has been furnished or pledged. 
5. The total line of credit available from these lending institutions. 
6. What percentage of your current assets does this indebtedness represent? 
7. If you have a worldwide line of credit available, what is the total line of credit 
available from foreign sources? 
NOTE: If you own other entities, you must provide consolidated information for all of 
your wholly and majority-owned subsidiaries (foreign and domestic). 
Attachment 7 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 7-8 12-10-2016 
 
 
B.  DOE NOTIFICATION BY LABORATORY 
Guidance: The Laboratory must notify the servicing DOE/NNSA field element as early as 
possible about the pending CRADA and submit a completed Certification (above) along 
with the following information:  
CRADA Title:   
Parties:  [Identify lab/Participant] 
Foreign Ownership Information:  [Identify name of company; type of company/line of 
work; nature of foreign ownership and/or foreign control; location of company; location of 
corporate office, if different; subsidiaries; number of employees.] 
Purpose:  [Briefly explain purpose of CRADA.  Include specific expertise of company and 
how that expertise relates to this CRADA.  Include brief statement on work that each Party 
will be doing.] 
Science and Technology (S&T) Risk Matrix:  [If the proposed CRADA is with a foreign 
entity from a Country of Risk, confirm that the current S&T Risk Matrix was reviewed to 
determine if the proposed CRADA is in an area identified as restricted.  If restricted, confirm 
that the cognizant Under Secretary approved an exemption request for the proposed CRADA.] 
Funding:  [Will Participant contribute funds-in and in-kind?  Are there DOE Program funds 
involved?  OFA funds?] 
Benefits:  [Explain benefits to DOE/NNSA program(s).] 
Trade Rep. Review:  [Identify date of completion/decision and any issues.  If a decision 
has not been received, state the USTR decision is pending and provide date that agreement 
was submitted to USTR for review.] 
National Security Issues:  [Provide classification review results.  Does the CRADA 
involve any sensitive or Military Critical Technologies?  ITAR-controlled information?] 
Fairness of Opportunity:  [Provide sufficient information to confirm that U.S. companies 
have been given an equal opportunity to participate in a similar CRADA.] 
U.S. Competitiveness:  [For a CRADA with a foreign-owned and/or foreign-controlled 
Participant, it's not enough to get the Participant to sign up to Article XXII.  The labs need 
to meet all legal requirements and also understand the political and public risks involved in 
partnering in the technology area and with the specific Participant.  The labs need to fully 
understand how the Participant plans to meet the Article XXII requirements and provide that 
info here.  Some factors to consider include: What is the deliverable, e.g., product, process, 
service?  What are their commercialization plans?  What are their plans for manufacturing?  
Does the Participant have manufacturing facilities and, if so, where?  Do they have U.S. 
facilities, manufacturing plants, suppliers?  What are their licensing plans for 
commercialization?  What is their foreign vs. U.S. market for product, process service?] 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 7 
12-10-2016 Page 7-9 
 
 
Export Control Determination:  [State if there are foreign nationals who may be part of 
Contractor’s and/or the Participant's project team and discuss that determination in light of 
the export review results.] 
CRADA Deviations:  [State whether or not changes have been negotiated in the DOE 
Model CRADA language.  A sample statement is as follows:  (Participant name) has 
negotiated a number of changes to the standard DOE Model CRADA language.  This 
language has been reviewed and approved by the legal counsel of Contractor and is being 
reviewed by (name of DOE/NNSA field element).] 
M&O Contractor POC:  [Name, e-mail and phone] 
Field Element Recommendation:  [Leave blank] 
Field Element POC:   [Leave blank] 
GUIDANCE FOR DOE NOTIFICATION: 
If the proposed Participant is foreign-owned or foreign-controlled, the M&O Contractor 
needs to pay special attention to the following factors: 
1. Export control determination; 
2. Classification review results; 
3. Coordination and approval for foreign nationals who would be part of the 
Participant’s project team; and U.S. Competitiveness pertaining to: 
a. Deliverables under the agreement; 
b. How Participant is going to meet U.S. Competitiveness requirements; 
and 
c. Whether or not Participant has the ability or plans to manufacture in 
the U.S. 
Additionally, the M&O Contractor must comply with the following requirements: 
1. Notify the servicing DOE/NNSA field elements early as possible about the 
pending CRADA and submit the completed DOE Notification. 
2. Review information available at the U.S. Trade Representative web page 
(http://www.ustr.gov).   
a. The M&O Contractor should consider the following factors in their 
review: 
Attachment 7 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 7-10 12-10-2016 
 
 
(1) Does the foreign government permit U.S. agencies, organizations 
and other U.S. persons to enter into cooperative R&D 
agreements? 
(2) Does the foreign government have policies to protect U.S. 
intellectual property rights? 
b. The documents to review include the following: 
(1) USTR Inventory of Foreign Trade Barriers:  The National Trade 
Estimate Report found at (www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-
office/reports-and-publications)   
(2) The most recent USTR Special 301 Review:  
(www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/reports-and-publications)  
(3) Any other relevant information, such as past USTR opinions on 
countries in light of new reports.  
3. Seek DOE Contracting Officer approval of the proposed CRADA.  The 
Contracting Officer may require the M&O Contractor to obtain input from the 
US Trade Representative before reaching a decision.  Information provided to 
the Contracting Officer must contain, but are not limited to the following:  
a. Nature of foreign ownership/control of the Participant (e.g., foreign-
owned, U.S.-controlled; U.S.-owned, foreign-controlled; foreign-
owned, foreign-controlled; etc.) 
 
b. Information obtained from USTR web site and answers to questions 
from paragraph 2(a), above. 
 
c. Results of classification and export control reviews. 
 
d. Fairness of Opportunity (FOO) checklist with sufficient information to 
confirm that U.S. companies have been given equal opportunities to 
participate in a similar CRADA.  
 
e. Any other information that the Contracting Officer feels is required to 
make a decision. 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 8 
12-10-2016 Page 8-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 8 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
U.S. COMPETITIVENESS / NET BENEFIT STATEMENT 
The Government, authorizing CRADAs, is seeking to transfer technology to companies 
with significant manufacturing and research facilities in the United States in a way that 
will provide short- and long-term benefits to the U.S. economy and the industrial 
competitiveness of such companies. 
The preferred benefit to the U.S. economy is the creation and maintenance of 
manufacturing capabilities and jobs within the United States. 
If the Participant(s) can’t agree, as part of the CRADA, to substantially manufacture 
any products, use any processes, or perform any services in the United States 
incorporating or resulting from inventions, copyrights, mask works, or protectable 
data arising from the CRADA work in which the Participant(s) has some commercial 
rights, then the  Participant(s) must furnish a description (hereinafter A Net Benefit 
Statement) of specific economic or other benefits to the U.S. economy that are 
related to the commercial use by Participant(s) of the technology being funded under 
the CRADA and that are commensurate with the Government’s contribution to the 
proposed work.   
The above-described agreement and/or Net Benefit Statement will be provided by the 
laboratory to the DOE field element according to the latest Net Benefit Statement 
Guidance. 
QUESTIONAIRE FOR CRADA PARTICIPANT  
The standard terms and conditions of a DOE Model CRADA include the U.S. 
Competitiveness provision, which reads:   
In exchange for the benefits received under this CRADA, the Participant therefore agrees to the 
following: 
1. Products embodying Intellectual Property developed under this CRADA shall be 
substantially manufactured in the United States, and 
2. Processes, services, and improvements thereof which are covered by Intellectual 
Property developed under this CRADA shall be incorporated into the Participant’s 
manufacturing facilities in the United States either prior to or simultaneously with 
implementation outside the United States. Such processes, services, and improvements, 
when implemented outside the United States, shall not result in reduction of the use of the 
same processes, services, or improvements in the United States. 
Attachment 8 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 8-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
If you cannot agree to this provision as written, then part of the process for finalizing your 
CRADA will include developing legally binding language acceptable to DOE that commits you 
to provide some other benefit to the U.S. economy, which will then be made a part of your 
agreement in lieu of the standard clause.  
At the end of this document, you will provide a statement for an alternate benefit to the US 
economy (referred to as Net Benefit Statement), which will be incorporated into the CRADA as 
an annex.  The following questions will assist you in developing an acceptable Net Benefit 
Statement that will be reviewed and approved by DOE. 
Title and number of CRADA: 
Contact Person (e.g., Patent Counsel), phone number, and e-mail address: 
Briefly describe your business model.  The description may include plans for 
manufacturing domestically and offshore.  Briefly explain why you need to manufacture in 
the locations you discuss.   
Future Benefits to the U.S. economy when creating and implementing Intellectual Property 
developed under the CRADA: 
What work under CRADA do you plan to do in the U.S.?  Work may include manufacturing, 
R&D, administration.  If you have built or will build a plant or R&D facility, what is the capacity 
and approximate number and type of employees?  What is the timeframe of the U.S.-based 
work?  Will you begin work in the U.S. right away, with later global diversification, or will the 
work be spread over several locations for the entire period of the CRADA?  Will your efforts 
result in the creation of new U.S. jobs?  If so, describe them.   
Participant makes the following specific commitments to U.S. investment:   
(You may list these in bullet or numbered form, or in paragraph form.  Be aware that DOE will 
require specific commitments.  You may include existing or planned facilities in the U.S. (if so, 
please describe what they’ll be and how many and what type of employees they may have)).  
Also, the projected timeline for building and operating the facilities.    
How will your work under the CRADA further the U.S. development of the technology?   
What commitments do you make to significantly reinvest profits from the 
commercialization of the intellectual property resulting from the work under this CRADA 
in the U.S. economy? 
What other benefits will your work have on the U.S. economy? 
Such benefits may include one or more of the following: 
DOE O 483.1B Attachment 8 
10-28-2024 Page 8-3 (and Page 8-4) 
 
 
• Direct or indirect investment in U.S.-based plant and equipment. 
• Creation of new and/or higher-quality U.S.-based jobs. 
• Enhancement of the domestic skills base. 
• Further domestic development of the technology. 
• Significant reinvestment of profits in the domestic economy. 
• Positive impact on the U.S. balance of payments in terms of product and 
service exports as well as foreign licensing royalties and receipts. 
• Appropriate recognition of U.S. taxpayer support for the technology; e.g., a 
quid-pro-quo commensurate with the economic benefit that would be 
domestically derived by the U.S. taxpayer from U.S.-based manufacture. 
• Cross-licensing, sublicensing, and reassignment provisions in licenses which 
seek to maximize the benefits to the U.S. taxpayer. 
The following Net Benefit Statement will be incorporated into the CRADA: 
[The Net Benefit Statement should be based on the answers to the above questions and provide a 
specific commitment on the part of the Participant to provide some significant net benefit to the 
U.S. economy in lieu of substantial U.S. manufacture.] 

DOE O 483.1B Attachment 9 
12-10-2016 Page 9-1  
 
 
ATTACHMENT 9 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 483.1B Chg 
3 as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 483.1B Chg 3) is inserted. 
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER NOTIFICATIONS FOR UNUSUAL 
CIRCUMSTANCES 
1. Background. DOE and its laboratory system are involved in large numbers of 
technology transfer activities. Most proceed smoothly and significantly benefit the 
Department, the private sector, and the nation as a whole. Some activities result in 
exceptional success, which DOE may want to promote. Other activities involve 
unusual circumstances (real or perceived issues that can attract significant attention), 
which need to be communicated to higher levels in DOE management. 
2. Notification Process. When concern arises about unusual circumstances in an 
existing or proposed CRADA activity, the field element will notify the appropriate 
Secretarial Officers. These include, if different, the Cognizant Secretarial Officer, 
and Program Secretarial Officer. Cognizant Secretarial Officers can provide advice 
or guidance as to whether a particular concern should be reported to a Secretarial 
Officer. 
3. Notification Criteria. Some notification criteria are specifically addressed in this 
Order or imposed by other Orders. 
a. The following are examples of situations that require a well-defined notification 
or approval process to be in place so that higher management will be notified. 
(1) DOE Model CRADA. Deviation from the double-underlined language 
in the DOE Model CRADA standard terms, conditions, and options, 
and the related DOE Model CRADA guidance. 
(2) Multi-laboratory CRADAs. These require notification of the relevant 
field elements, which are responsible for ensuring coordination and 
resolution of any conflicting or varying terms or arrangements. 
(3) Sensitive technologies. Projects related to sensitive technologies (as 
outlined in the Sensitive Subjects List available from the Nuclear 
Transfer and Supplier Policy Division, NN-43), nuclear applied 
technologies, or work involving export controlled information require 
the relevant approvals. 
(4) Human or animal subject involvement. 
(a) Human subject involvement. If the laboratory holds an assurance 
of compliance with human subject regulations, it may approve 
Attachment 9 DOE O 483.1B 
Page 9-2 12-10-2016 
 
 
such activities; however, the field element must be notified. If the 
laboratory does not hold an assurance of compliance (either 
Department of Health and Human Services or DOE), the Office of 
Science must approve the activities.  If the Participant will be 
performing the human subject testing, the Contractor will notify 
DOE Head of Field Element and Contracting Officer of such 
activity before executing the CRADA. 
(b) Animal subject involvement. If the laboratory has an institutional 
animal care and use committee, it may approve such activities; 
however, the field office must be notified. If the laboratory does 
not have an institutional animal care and use committee, it is not 
authorized to conduct research activities involving animals.  If the 
Participant will be performing the animal subject testing, the 
Contractor will notify the DOE Head of Field Element and 
Contracting Officer of such activity before executing the CRADA. 
(5) Environment, Safety and Health and National Environmental Policy 
Act. Normal considerations are handled within the standard process. 
(6) For all other circumstances the judgment and experience of DOE field 
element personnel is the primary determiner of when notification 
should occur. DOE encourages early discussion among laboratories, 
field elements, and program offices to make this determination. The 
following are examples of circumstances under which Headquarters 
notification might be appropriate based on field judgment. 
(7) foreign participation and issues; 
(8) alternative benefits to U.S. manufacturing requirements having a 
potential for significant impact on the U.S. economy; 
(9) size of activity and impact on the laboratory; 
(10) large funds-in from the Participant; 
(11) activities that may involve unique or unusual health, safety, or 
environmental issues or a significant real or perceived potential 
environmental impact; potential for major economic impact to the 
relevant industrial or commercial sector or for the appearance of 
inappropriate competition with the private sector; and 
(12) potential for significant political or media interest or significant public 
or private sector controversy. 
 