--- page 1 ---
517 
Department of Energy § 830.2 
(2) It is normally classified at a Severity 
Level III; 
(3) It was promptly reported to DOE; 
(4) Prompt and appropriate corrective ac-
tion will be taken, including measures to 
prevent recurrence; and 
(5) It was not a willful violation or a viola-
tion that could reasonably be expected to 
have been prevented by the DOE contractor’s 
corrective action for a previous violation. 
e. DOE may refrain from issuing a notice 
of violation for an act or omission consti-
tuting noncompliance that meets all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) It was an isolated Severity Level III 
violation identified during an inspection or 
evaluation conducted by the Office of Inde-
pendent Oversight, or a DOE security survey, 
or during some other DOE assessment activ-
ity; 
(2) The identified noncompliance was prop-
erly reported by the contractor upon dis-
covery; 
(3) The contractor initiated or completed 
appropriate assessment and corrective ac-
tions within a reasonable period, usually be-
fore the termination of the onsite inspection 
or integrated performance assessment; and 
(4) The violation was not willful or one 
which could reasonably be expected to have 
been prevented by the DOE contractor’s cor-
rective action for a previous violation. 
f. In situations where corrective actions 
have been completed before termination of 
an inspection or assessment, a formal re-
sponse from the contractor is not required 
and the inspection or integrated performance 
assessment report serves to document the 
violation and the corrective action. However, 
in all instances, the contractor is required to 
report the noncompliance through estab-
lished reporting mechanisms so the non-
compliance issue and any corrective actions 
can be properly tracked and monitored. 
g. If DOE initiates an enforcement action 
for a violation at a Severity Level II or III 
and, as part of the corrective action for that 
violation, the DOE contractor identifies 
other examples of the violation with the 
same root cause, DOE may refrain from ini-
tiating an additional enforcement action. In 
determining whether to exercise this discre-
tion, DOE will consider whether the DOE 
contractor acted reasonably and in a timely 
manner appropriate to the security signifi-
cance of the initial violation, the com-
prehensiveness of the corrective action, 
whether the matter was reported, and wheth-
er the additional violation(s) substantially 
change the security significance or character 
of the concern arising out of the initial vio-
lation. 
h. The preceding paragraphs are solely in-
tended to be examples indicating when en-
forcement discretion may be exercised to 
forego the issuance of a civil penalty or, in 
some cases, the initiation of any enforce-
ment action at all. However, notwith-
standing these examples, a civil penalty may 
be proposed or notice of violation issued 
when, in DOE’s judgment, such action is war-
ranted on the basis of the circumstances of 
an individual case. 
[70 FR 3607, Jan. 26, 2005, as amended at 71 
FR 68733, Nov. 28, 2006; 74 FR 66033, Dec. 14, 
2009; 79 FR 19, Jan. 2, 2014; 81 FR 41795, June 
28, 2016] 
PART 830—NUCLEAR SAFETY 
MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 
830.1 Scope. 
830.2 Exclusions. 
830.3 Definitions. 
830.4 General requirements. 
830.5 Enforcement. 
830.6 Recordkeeping. 
830.7 Graded approach. 
Subpart A—Quality Assurance 
Requirements 
830.120 Scope. 
830.121 Quality Assurance Program (QAP). 
830.122 Quality assurance criteria. 
Subpart B—Safety Basis Requirements 
830.200 Scope. 
830.201 Performance of work. 
830.202 Safety basis. 
830.203 Unreviewed safety question process. 
830.204 Documented safety analysis. 
830.205 Technical safety requirements. 
830.206 Preliminary documented safety 
analysis. 
830.207 DOE approval of safety basis. 
APPENDIX A TO SUBPART B TO PART 830—G EN-
ERAL STATEMENT OF SAFETY BASIS POL-
ICY 
AUTHORITY: 42 U.S.C. 2201; 42 U.S.C. 7101 et 
seq.; and 50 U.S.C. 2401 et seq. 
SOURCE: 85 FR 66205, Oct. 19, 2020, unless 
otherwise noted. 
§ 830.1 Scope. 
This part governs the conduct of DOE 
contractors, DOE personnel, and other 
persons conducting activities (includ-
ing providing items and services) that 
affect, or may affect, the safety of DOE 
nuclear facilities. 
§ 830.2 Exclusions. 
This part does not apply to: 
(a) Activities that are regulated 
through a license by the Nuclear Regu-
latory Commission (NRC) or a State 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00527 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 2 ---
518 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 830.3 
under an Agreement with the NRC, in-
cluding activities certified by the NRC 
under section 1701 of the Atomic En-
ergy Act (Act); 
(b) Activities conducted under the 
authority of the Director, Naval Nu-
clear Propulsion, pursuant to Execu-
tive Order 12344, as set forth in Public 
Law 106– 65; 
(c) Transportation activities which 
are regulated by the Department of 
Transportation; 
(d) Activities conducted under the 
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, as 
amended, and any facility identified 
under section 202(5) of the Energy Re-
organization Act of 1974, as amended; 
and 
(e) Activities related to the launch 
approval and actual launch of nuclear 
energy systems into space. 
§ 830.3 Definitions. 
(a) The following definitions apply to 
this part: 
Administrative controls means the pro-
visions relating to organization and 
management, procedures, record-
keeping, assessment, and reporting 
necessary to ensure safe operation of a 
facility. 
Bases appendix means an appendix 
that describes the basis of the limits 
and other requirements in technical 
safety requirements. 
Critical assembly means special nu-
clear devices designed and used to sus-
tain nuclear reactions, which may be 
subject to frequent core and lattice 
configuration change and which fre-
quently may be used as mockups of re-
actor configurations. 
Criticality means the condition in 
which a nuclear fission chain reaction 
becomes self-sustaining. 
Design features means the design fea-
tures of a nuclear facility specified in 
the technical safety requirements that, 
if altered or modified, would have a 
significant effect on safe operation. 
Document means recorded informa-
tion that describes, specifies, reports, 
certifies, requires, or provides data or 
results. 
Documented safety analysis means a 
documented analysis of the extent to 
which a nuclear facility can be oper-
ated safely with respect to workers, 
the public, and the environment, in-
cluding a description of the conditions, 
safe boundaries, and hazard controls 
that provide the basis for ensuring 
safety. 
Environmental restoration activities 
means the process(es) by which con-
taminated sites and facilities are iden-
tified and characterized and by which 
contamination is contained, treated, or 
removed and disposed. 
Fissionable materials means a nuclide 
capable of sustaining a neutron-in-
duced chain reaction (e.g., uranium-233, 
uranium-235, plutonium-238, pluto-
nium-239, plutonium-241, neptunium- 
237, americium-241, and curium-244). 
Graded approach means the process of 
ensuring that the level of analysis, doc-
umentation, and actions used to com-
ply with a requirement in this part are 
commensurate with: 
(1) The relative importance to safety, 
safeguards, and security; 
(2) The magnitude of any hazard in-
volved; 
(3) The life cycle stage of a facility; 
(4) The programmatic mission of a fa-
cility; 
(5) The particular characteristics of a 
facility; 
(6) The relative importance of radio-
logical and nonradiological hazards; 
and 
(7) Any other relevant factor. 
Hazard means a source of danger (i.e., 
material, energy source, or operation) 
with the potential to cause illness, in-
jury, or death to a person or damage to 
a facility or to the environment (with-
out regard to the likelihood or credi-
bility of accident scenarios or con-
sequence mitigation). 
Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 DOE nu-
clear facilities means nuclear facilities 
that meet the criteria for their respec-
tive hazard category consistent with 
the provisions of DOE–STD–1027–92, 
Change Notice 1. Hazard Category 1, 2, 
and 3 DOE nuclear facilities are re-
quired to have safety bases established 
in accordance with Subpart B of this 
part. Hazard categories are based on 
their radioactive material inventories 
and the potential consequences to the 
public, workers, and the environment. 
Hazard Category 1 represents the high-
est potential consequence and Hazard 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00528 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 3 ---
519 
Department of Energy § 830.3 
Category 3 represents the lowest poten-
tial consequence of the facilities re-
quired to establish safety bases. 
Hazard controls means measures to 
eliminate, limit, or mitigate hazards to 
workers, the public, or the environ-
ment, including: 
(1) Physical, design, structural, and 
engineering features; 
(2) Safety structures, systems, and 
components; 
(3) Safety management programs; 
(4) Technical safety requirements; 
and 
(5) Other controls necessary to pro-
vide adequate protection from hazards. 
Item is an all-inclusive term used in 
place of any of the following: Appur-
tenance, assembly, component, equip-
ment, material, module, part, product, 
structure, subassembly, subsystem, 
system, unit, or support systems. 
Limiting conditions for operation 
means the limits that represent the 
lowest functional capability or per-
formance level of safety structures, 
systems, and components required for 
safe operations. 
Limiting control settings means the 
settings on safety systems that control 
process variables to prevent exceeding 
a safety limit. 
Low-level residual fixed radioactivity 
means the remaining radioactivity fol-
lowing reasonable efforts to remove ra-
dioactive systems, components, and 
stored materials. The remaining radio-
activity is composed of surface con-
tamination that is fixed following 
chemical cleaning or some similar 
process; a component of surface con-
tamination that can be picked up by 
smears; or activated materials within 
structures. The radioactivity can be 
characterized as low-level if the 
smearable radioactivity is less than 
the values defined for removable con-
tamination by 10 CFR part 835, Appen-
dix D, Surface Contamination Values, 
and the hazard analysis results show 
that no credible accident scenario or 
work practices would release the re-
maining fixed radioactivity or activa-
tion components at levels that would 
prudently require the use of active 
safety systems, structures, or compo-
nents to prevent or mitigate a release 
of radioactive materials. 
Major modification means a modifica-
tion to a DOE nuclear facility that sub-
stantially changes the existing safety 
basis for the facility. 
New Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 DOE 
nuclear facility means a Hazard Cat-
egory 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility 
that is in design or under construction 
that does not yet have a DOE approved 
safety basis. 
Nonreactor nuclear facility means 
those facilities, activities or operations 
that involve, or will involve, radio-
active and/or fissionable materials in 
such form and quantity that a nuclear 
or a nuclear explosive hazard poten-
tially exists to workers, the public, or 
the environment, but does not include 
accelerators and their operations and 
does not include activities involving 
only incidental use and generation of 
radioactive materials or radiation such 
as check and calibration sources, use of 
radioactive sources in research and ex-
perimental and analytical laboratory 
activities, electron microscopes, and X- 
ray machines. 
Nuclear facility means a reactor or a 
nonreactor nuclear facility where an 
activity is conducted for or on behalf of 
DOE and includes any related area, 
structure, facility, or activity to the 
extent necessary to ensure proper im-
plementation of the requirements es-
tablished by this Part. 
Operating limits means those limits 
required to ensure the safe operation of 
a nuclear facility, including limiting 
control settings and limiting condi-
tions for operation. 
Preliminary documented safety analysis 
means documentation prepared in con-
nection with the design and construc-
tion of a new Hazard Category 1, 2, or 
3 DOE nuclear facility or a major modi-
fication to an existing Hazard Category 
1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility that pro-
vides a reasonable basis for the pre-
liminary conclusion that the nuclear 
facility can be operated safely through 
the consideration of factors such as: 
(1) The nuclear safety design criteria 
to be satisfied; 
(2) A safety analysis that derives as-
pects of design that are necessary to 
satisfy the nuclear safety design cri-
teria; and 
(3) An initial listing of the safety 
management programs that must be 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00529 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 4 ---
520 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 830.3 
developed to address operational safety 
considerations. 
Process means a series of actions that 
achieves an end or result. 
Quality means the condition achieved 
when an item, service, or process meets 
or exceeds the user’s requirements and 
expectations. 
Quality assurance means all those ac-
tions that provide confidence that 
quality is achieved. 
Quality Assurance Program (QAP) 
means the overall program or manage-
ment system established to assign re-
sponsibilities and authorities, define 
policies and requirements, and provide 
for the performance and assessment of 
work. 
Reactor means any apparatus that is 
designed or used to sustain nuclear 
chain reactions in a controlled manner 
such as research, test, and power reac-
tors, and critical and pulsed assemblies 
and any assembly that is designed to 
perform subcritical experiments that 
could potentially reach criticality; 
and, unless modified by words such as 
containment, vessel, or core, refers to 
the entire facility, including the hous-
ing, equipment and associated areas de-
voted to the operation and mainte-
nance of one or more reactor cores. 
Record means a completed document 
or other media that provides objective 
evidence of an item, service, or process. 
Safety basis means the documented 
safety analysis and hazard controls 
that provide reasonable assurance that 
a DOE nuclear facility can be operated 
safely in a manner that adequately 
protects workers, the public, and the 
environment. 
Safety class structures, systems, and 
components means the structures, sys-
tems, or components, including por-
tions of process systems, whose preven-
tive or mitigative function is necessary 
to limit radioactive hazardous mate-
rial exposure to the public, as deter-
mined from safety analyses. 
Safety evaluation report means the re-
port prepared by DOE to document: 
(1) The sufficiency of the documented 
safety analysis for a Hazard Category 
1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility; 
(2) The extent to which a contractor 
has satisfied the requirements of Sub-
part B of this part; and 
(3) The basis for approval by DOE of 
the safety basis for the facility, includ-
ing any conditions for approval. 
Safety limits means the limits on 
process variables associated with those 
safety class physical barriers, gen-
erally passive, that are necessary for 
the intended facility function and that 
are required to guard against the un-
controlled release of radioactive mate-
rials. 
Safety management program means a 
program designed to ensure a facility is 
operated in a manner that adequately 
protects workers, the public, and the 
environment by covering a topic such 
as: Quality assurance; maintenance of 
safety systems; personnel training; 
conduct of operations; inadvertent 
criticality protection; emergency pre-
paredness; fire protection; waste man-
agement; or radiological protection of 
workers, the public, and the environ-
ment. 
Safety management system means an 
integrated safety management system 
established consistent with 48 CFR 
970.5223–1, Integration of environment, 
safety, and health into work planning 
and execution. 
Safety significant structures, systems, 
and components means the structures, 
systems, and components which are 
not designated as safety class struc-
tures, systems, and components, but 
whose preventive or mitigative func-
tion is a major contributor to defense 
in depth and/or worker safety as deter-
mined from safety analyses. 
Safety structures, systems, and compo-
nents means both safety class struc-
tures, systems, and components and 
safety significant structures, systems, 
and components. 
Service means the performance of 
work, such as design, manufacturing, 
construction, fabrication, assembly, 
decontamination, environmental res-
toration, waste management, labora-
tory sample analyses, inspection, non-
destructive examination/testing, envi-
ronmental qualification, equipment 
qualification, repair, installation, or 
the like. 
Surveillance requirements means re-
quirements relating to test, calibra-
tion, or inspection to ensure that the 
necessary operability and quality of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00530 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 5 ---
521 
Department of Energy § 830.121 
safety structures, systems, and compo-
nents and their support systems re-
quired for safe operations are main-
tained, that facility operation is within 
safety limits, and that limiting control 
settings and limiting conditions for op-
eration are met. 
Technical safety requirements (TSRs) 
means the limits, controls, and related 
actions that establish the specific pa-
rameters and requisite actions for the 
safe operation of a nuclear facility and 
include, as appropriate for the work 
and the hazards identified in the docu-
mented safety analysis for the facility: 
Safety limits, operating limits, surveil-
lance requirements, administrative and 
management controls, use and applica-
tion provisions, and design features, as 
well as a bases appendix. 
Unreviewed Safety Question (USQ) 
means a situation where: 
(1) The probability of the occurrence 
or the consequences of an accident or 
the malfunction of equipment impor-
tant to safety previously evaluated in 
the documented safety analysis could 
be increased; 
(2) The possibility of an accident or 
malfunction of a different type than 
any evaluated previously in the docu-
mented safety analysis could be cre-
ated; or 
(3) The documented safety analysis 
may not be bounding or may be other-
wise inadequate. 
Unreviewed Safety Question process 
means the mechanism for keeping a 
safety basis current by reviewing po-
tential unreviewed safety questions, re-
porting unreviewed safety questions to 
DOE, and obtaining approval from DOE 
prior to taking any action that in-
volves an unreviewed safety question. 
Use and application provisions means 
the basic instructions for applying 
technical safety requirements. 
(b) Terms defined in the Act or in 10 
CFR part 820 and not defined in this 
section of the rule are to be used con-
sistent with the meanings given in the 
Act or in 10 CFR part 820. 
§ 830.4 General requirements. 
(a) No person may take or cause to be 
taken any action inconsistent with the 
requirements of this part. 
(b) A contractor responsible for a nu-
clear facility must ensure implementa-
tion of, and compliance with, the re-
quirements of this part. 
(c) The requirements of this part 
must be implemented in a manner that 
provides reasonable assurance of ade-
quate protection of workers, the pub-
lic, and the environment from adverse 
consequences, taking into account the 
work to be performed and the associ-
ated hazards. 
(d) If there is no contractor for a 
DOE nuclear facility, DOE must ensure 
implementation of, and compliance 
with, the requirements of this part. 
§ 830.5 Enforcement. 
The requirements in this part are 
DOE Nuclear Safety Requirements and 
are subject to enforcement by all ap-
propriate means, including the imposi-
tion of civil and criminal penalties in 
accordance with the provisions of 10 
CFR part 820. 
§ 830.6 Recordkeeping. 
A contractor must maintain com-
plete and accurate records as necessary 
to substantiate compliance with the re-
quirements of this part. 
§ 830.7 Graded approach. 
Where appropriate, a contractor 
must use a graded approach to imple-
ment the requirements of this part, 
document the basis of the graded ap-
proach used, and submit that docu-
mentation to DOE. The graded ap-
proach may not be used in imple-
menting the unreviewed safety ques-
tion (USQ) process or in implementing 
technical safety requirements. 
Subpart A—Quality Assurance 
Requirements 
§ 830.120 Scope. 
This subpart establishes quality as-
surance requirements for contractors 
conducting activities, including pro-
viding items or services that affect, or 
may affect, nuclear safety of DOE nu-
clear facilities. 
§ 830.121 Quality Assurance Program 
(QAP). 
(a) Contractors conducting activities, 
including providing items or services, 
that affect, or may affect, the nuclear 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00531 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 6 ---
522 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 830.122 
safety of DOE nuclear facilities must 
conduct work in accordance with the 
Quality Assurance criteria in § 830.122. 
(b) The contractor responsible for a 
DOE nuclear facility must: 
(1) Submit a QAP to DOE for ap-
proval and regard the QAP as approved 
90 days after submittal, unless it is ap-
proved or rejected by DOE at an earlier 
date. 
(2) Modify the QAP as directed by 
DOE. 
(3) Annually submit any changes to 
the DOE-approved QAP to DOE for ap-
proval. Justify in the submittal why 
the changes continue to satisfy the 
quality assurance requirements. 
(4) Conduct work in accordance with 
the QAP. 
(c) The QAP must: 
(1) Describe how the quality assur-
ance criteria of § 830.122 are satisfied. 
(2) Integrate the quality assurance 
criteria with the Safety Management 
System, or describe how the quality as-
surance criteria apply to the Safety 
Management System. 
(3) Use voluntary consensus stand-
ards in its development and implemen-
tation, where practicable and con-
sistent with contractual and regu-
latory requirements, and identify the 
standards used. 
(4) Describe how the contractor re-
sponsible for the nuclear facility en-
sures that subcontractors and suppliers 
satisfy the criteria of § 830.122. 
§ 830.122 Quality assurance criteria. 
The QAP must address the following 
management, performance, and assess-
ment criteria: 
(a) Criterion 1—Management/Program. 
(1) Establish an organizational struc-
ture, functional responsibilities, levels 
of authority, and interfaces for those 
managing, performing, and assessing 
the work. 
(2) Establish management processes, 
including planning, scheduling, and 
providing resources for the work. 
(b) Criterion 2—Management/Personnel 
Training and Qualification. (1) Train and 
qualify personnel to be capable of per-
forming their assigned work. 
(2) Provide continuing training to 
personnel to maintain their job pro-
ficiency. 
(c) Criterion 3—Management/Quality 
Improvement. (1) Establish and imple-
ment processes to detect and prevent 
quality problems. 
(2) Identify, control, and correct 
items, services, and processes that do 
not meet established requirements. 
(3) Identify the causes of problems 
and work to prevent recurrence as a 
part of correcting the problem. 
(4) Review item characteristics, proc-
ess implementation, and other quality- 
related information to identify items, 
services, and processes needing im-
provement. 
(d) Criterion 4—Management/Docu-
ments and Records. (1) Prepare, review, 
approve, issue, use, and revise docu-
ments to prescribe processes, specify 
requirements, or establish design. 
(2) Specify, prepare, review, approve, 
and maintain records. 
(e) Criterion 5—Performance/Work 
Processes. (1) Perform work consistent 
with technical standards, administra-
tive controls, and other hazard con-
trols adopted to meet regulatory or 
contract requirements, using approved 
instructions, procedures, or other ap-
propriate means. 
(2) Identify and control items to en-
sure their proper use. 
(3) Maintain items to prevent their 
damage, loss, or deterioration. 
(4) Calibrate and maintain equipment 
used for process monitoring or data 
collection. 
(f) Criterion 6—Performance/Design. (1) 
Design items and processes using sound 
engineering/scientific principles and 
appropriate standards. 
(2) Incorporate applicable require-
ments and design bases in design work 
and design changes. 
(3) Identify and control design inter-
faces. 
(4) Verify or validate the adequacy of 
design products using individuals or 
groups other than those who performed 
the work. 
(5) Verify or validate work before ap-
proval and implementation of the de-
sign. 
(g) Criterion 7—Performance/Procure-
ment. (1) Procure items and services 
that meet established requirements 
and perform as specified. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00532 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 7 ---
523 
Department of Energy § 830.203 
(2) Evaluate and select prospective 
suppliers on the basis of specified cri-
teria. 
Establish and implement processes to 
ensure that approved suppliers con-
tinue to provide acceptable items and 
services. 
(h) Criterion 8—Performance/Inspection 
and Acceptance Testing. (1) Inspect and 
test specified items, services, and proc-
esses using established acceptance and 
performance criteria. 
(2) Calibrate and maintain equipment 
used for inspections and tests. 
(i) Criterion 9—Assessment/Management 
Assessment. Ensure managers assess 
their management processes and iden-
tify and correct problems that hinder 
the organization from achieving its ob-
jectives. 
(j) Criterion 10—Assessment/Inde-
pendent Assessment. (1) Plan and con-
duct independent assessments to meas-
ure item and service quality, to meas-
ure the adequacy of work performance, 
and to promote improvement. 
(2) Establish sufficient authority, and 
freedom from line management, for the 
group performing independent assess-
ments. 
(3) Ensure persons who perform inde-
pendent assessments are technically 
qualified and knowledgeable in the 
areas to be assessed. 
Subpart B—Safety Basis 
Requirements 
§ 830.200 Scope. 
This Subpart establishes safety basis 
requirements for Hazard Category 1, 2, 
and 3 DOE nuclear facilities. 
§ 830.201 Performance of work. 
A contractor must perform work in 
accordance with the DOE-approved 
safety basis for a Hazard Category 1, 2, 
or 3 DOE nuclear facility and, in par-
ticular, with the hazard controls that 
ensure adequate protection of workers, 
the public, and the environment. 
§ 830.202 Safety basis. 
(a) The contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must establish and maintain 
the safety basis for the facility. 
(b) In establishing the safety basis 
for a Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nu-
clear facility, the contractor respon-
sible for the facility must: 
(1) Define the scope of the work to be 
performed; 
(2) Identify and analyze the hazards 
associated with the work; 
(3) Categorize the facility consistent 
with DOE–STD–1027–92 (‘‘Hazard Cat-
egorization and Accident Analysis 
Techniques for compliance with DOE 
Order 5480.23, Nuclear Safety Analysis 
Reports,’’ Change Notice 1, September 
1997); 
(4) Prepare a documented safety anal-
ysis for the facility; and 
(5) Establish the hazard controls 
upon which the contractor will rely to 
ensure adequate protection of workers, 
the public, and the environment. 
(c) In maintaining the safety basis 
for a Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nu-
clear facility, the contractor respon-
sible for the facility must: 
(1) Update the safety basis to keep it 
current and to reflect changes in the 
facility, the work and the hazards as 
they are analyzed in the documented 
safety analysis; 
(2) Annually provide DOE the current 
documented safety analysis or a letter 
stating that there have been no 
changes in the documented safety anal-
ysis since the prior submittal; and 
(3) Incorporate in the safety basis 
any changes, conditions, or hazard con-
trols directed by DOE. 
§ 830.203 Unreviewed safety question 
process. 
(a) The contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must establish, implement, and 
take actions consistent with a DOE-ap-
proved USQ procedure that meets the 
requirements of this section. 
(b) The contractor responsible for a 
new Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nu-
clear facility must submit for DOE ap-
proval a procedure for its USQ process 
on a schedule that allows DOE ap-
proval in a safety evaluation report 
issued pursuant to § 830. 207(a) of this 
part. 
(c) The contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must implement the DOE-ap-
proved USQ procedure in situations 
where there is a: 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00533 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 8 ---
524 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 830.204 
(1) Temporary or permanent change 
in the facility as described in the exist-
ing documented safety analysis; 
(2) Temporary or permanent change 
in the procedures as described in the 
existing documented safety analysis; 
(3) Test or experiment not described 
in the existing documented safety anal-
ysis; or 
(4) Potential inadequacy of the docu-
mented safety analysis because the 
analysis potentially may not be bound-
ing or may be otherwise inadequate. 
(d) A contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must obtain DOE approval 
prior to taking any action determined 
to involve a USQ. 
(e) The contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must annually provide to DOE 
a summary of the USQ determinations 
performed since the prior submittal. 
(f) If a contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility discovers or is made aware of a 
potential inadequacy of the docu-
mented safety analysis, it must: 
(1) Take action, as appropriate, to 
place or maintain the facility in a safe 
condition until an evaluation of the 
safety of the situation is completed; 
(2) Notify DOE of the situation; 
(3) Perform a USQ determination and 
notify DOE promptly of the results; 
and 
(4) Submit the evaluation of the safe-
ty of the situation to DOE prior to re-
moving any operational restrictions 
initiated to meet paragraph (f)(1) of 
this section. 
§ 830.204 Documented safety analysis. 
(a) The contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must obtain approval from 
DOE for the methodology used to pre-
pare the documented safety analysis 
for the facility unless the contractor 
uses a methodology set forth in Table 1 
of Appendix A to this part. 
(b) The documented safety analysis 
for a Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nu-
clear facility must, as appropriate for 
the complexities and hazards associ-
ated with the facility: 
(1) Describe the facility (including 
the design of safety structures, sys-
tems and components) and the work to 
be performed; 
(2) Provide a systematic identifica-
tion of both natural and man-made 
hazards associated with the facility; 
(3) Evaluate normal, abnormal, and 
accident conditions, including consid-
eration of natural and man-made exter-
nal events, identification of energy 
sources or processes that might con-
tribute to the generation or uncon-
trolled release of radioactive and other 
hazardous materials, and consideration 
of the need for analysis of accidents 
which may be beyond the design basis 
of the facility; 
(4) Derive the hazard controls nec-
essary to ensure adequate protection of 
workers, the public, and the environ-
ment, demonstrate the adequacy of 
these controls to eliminate, limit, or 
mitigate identified hazards, and define 
the process for maintaining the hazard 
controls current at all times and con-
trolling their use; 
(5) Define the characteristics of the 
safety management programs nec-
essary to ensure the safe operation of 
the facility, including (where applica-
ble) quality assurance, procedures, 
maintenance, personnel training, con-
duct of operations, emergency pre-
paredness, fire protection, waste man-
agement, and radiation protection; and 
(6) With respect to a nonreactor nu-
clear facility with fissionable material 
in a form and amount sufficient to pose 
a potential for criticality, define a 
criticality safety program that: 
(i) Ensures that operations with fis-
sionable material remain subcritical 
under all normal and credible abnor-
mal conditions; 
(ii) Identifies applicable nuclear 
criticality safety standards; and 
(iii) Describes how the program 
meets applicable nuclear criticality 
safety standards. 
§ 830.205 Technical safety require-
ments. 
(a) A contractor responsible for a 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility must: 
(1) Develop technical safety require-
ments that are derived from the docu-
mented safety analysis; 
(2) Prior to use, obtain DOE approval 
of technical safety requirements and 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00534 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 9 ---
525 
Department of Energy Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
any change to technical safety require-
ments; and 
(3) Notify DOE of any violation of a 
technical safety requirement. 
(b) A contractor may take emergency 
actions that depart from an approved 
technical safety requirement when no 
actions consistent with the technical 
safety requirement are immediately 
apparent, and when these actions are 
needed to protect workers, the public 
or the environment from imminent and 
significant harm. Such actions must be 
approved by a certified operator for a 
reactor or by a person in authority as 
designated in the technical safety re-
quirements for nonreactor nuclear fa-
cilities. The contractor must report 
the emergency actions to DOE as soon 
as practicable. 
(c) A contractor for an environ-
mental restoration activity may follow 
the provisions of 29 CFR 1910.120 or 29 
CFR 1926.65 to develop the appropriate 
hazard controls (rather than the provi-
sions for technical safety requirements 
in paragraph (a) of this section), pro-
vided the activity involves either: 
(1) Work not done within a perma-
nent structure, or 
(2) The decommissioning of a facility 
with only low-level residual fixed ra-
dioactivity. 
§ 830.206 Preliminary documented 
safety analysis. 
Prior to construction of a new Haz-
ard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear fa-
cility or a major modification to an ex-
isting Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE 
nuclear facility, the contractor respon-
sible for the design and construction of 
the new facility or major modification 
must: 
(a) Prepare a preliminary docu-
mented safety analysis for the facility, 
and 
(b) Obtain DOE approval of: 
(1) The nuclear safety design criteria 
to be used in preparing the preliminary 
documented safety analysis unless the 
contractor uses the design criteria in 
DOE Order 420.1, Facility Safety, or suc-
cessor document; and 
(2) The preliminary documented safe-
ty analysis before the contractor can 
procure materials or components or 
begin construction; provided that DOE 
may authorize the contractor to per-
form limited procurement and con-
struction activities without approval 
of a preliminary documented safety 
analysis if DOE determines that the ac-
tivities are not detrimental to public 
health and safety and are in the best 
interests of DOE. 
§ 830.207 DOE approval of safety basis. 
(a) With respect to a new Hazard Cat-
egory 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility or 
a major modification to an existing 
Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear 
facility, a contractor may not begin 
operation of the facility or modifica-
tion prior to the issuance of a safety 
evaluation report in which DOE ap-
proves the safety basis for the facility 
or modification. 
(b) Pending issuance of a safety eval-
uation report in which DOE approves 
an updated or amended safety basis for 
an existing Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 
DOE nuclear facility, the contractor 
responsible for the facility must con-
tinue to perform work in accordance 
with the DOE-approved safety basis for 
the facility and maintain the existing 
safety basis consistent with the re-
quirements of this Subpart. 
APPENDIX A TO SUBPART B TO PART 
830—G ENERAL STATEMENT OF SAFE-
TY BASIS POLICY 
A. Introduction 
This appendix describes DOE’s expecta-
tions for the safety basis requirements of 10 
CFR part 830, acceptable methods for imple-
menting these requirements, and criteria 
DOE will use to evaluate compliance with 
these requirements. This appendix does not 
create any new requirements and should be 
used consistently with DOE’s policy that 
work be conducted safely and efficiently and 
in a manner that ensures protection of work-
ers, the public, and the environment. 
B. Purpose 
1. The safety basis requirements of Part 830 
require the contractor responsible for a DOE 
nuclear facility to analyze the facility, the 
work to be performed, and the associated 
hazards and to identify the conditions, safe 
boundaries, and hazard controls necessary to 
protect workers, the public and the environ-
ment from adverse consequences. These 
analyses and hazard controls constitute the 
safety basis upon which the contractor and 
DOE rely to conclude that the facility can be 
operated safely. Performing work consistent 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00535 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 10 ---
526 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
with the safety basis provides reasonable as-
surance of adequate protection of workers, 
the public, and the environment. 
2. The safety basis requirements are in-
tended to further the objective of making 
safety an integral part of how work is per-
formed throughout the DOE complex. Devel-
oping a thorough understanding of a nuclear 
facility, the work to be performed, the asso-
ciated hazards and the needed hazard con-
trols is essential to integrating safety into 
management and work at all levels. Per-
forming work in accordance with the safety 
basis for a nuclear facility is the realization 
of that objective. 
C. Scope 
1. A contractor must establish and main-
tain a safety basis for a Hazard Category 1, 
2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility because these fa-
cilities have the potential for significant ra-
diological consequences. DOE–STD–1027 sets 
forth the methodology for categorizing a 
DOE nuclear facility based on the inventory 
of radioactive materials. 
2. Unlike the quality assurance require-
ments of Part 830 that apply to all DOE nu-
clear facilities, the safety basis requirements 
only apply to Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
DOE nuclear facilities and do not apply to 
nuclear facilities below Hazard Category 3. 
D. Integrated Safety Management 
1. The safety basis requirements are con-
sistent with integrated safety management. 
DOE expects that, if a contractor complies 
with the Department of Energy Acquisition 
Regulation (DEAR) clause on integration of 
environment, safety, and health into work 
planning and execution (48 CFR 970.5223–1, 
Integration of Environment, Safety and Health 
into Work Planning and Execution ) and the 
DEAR clause on laws, regulations, and DOE 
directives (48 CFR 970.5204–2, Laws, Regula-
tions and DOE Directives), the contractor 
will have established the foundation to meet 
the safety basis requirements. 
2. The processes embedded in a safety man-
agement system should lead to a contractor 
establishing adequate safety bases and safety 
management programs that will meet the 
safety basis requirements of this Subpart. 
Consequently, the DOE expects if a con-
tractor has adequately implemented inte-
grated safety management, few additional 
requirements will stem from this Subpart 
and, in such cases, the existing safety basis 
prepared in accordance with integrated safe-
ty management provisions, including exist-
ing DOE safety requirements in contracts, 
should meet the requirements of this Sub-
part. 
3. DOE does not expect there to be any con-
flict between contractual requirements and 
regulatory requirements. In fact, DOE ex-
pects that contract provisions will be used to 
provide more detail on implementation of 
safety basis requirements such as preparing 
a documented safety analysis, developing 
technical safety requirements, and imple-
menting a USQ process. 
E. Enforcement of Safety Basis Requirements 
1. Enforcement of the safety basis require-
ments will be performance oriented. That is, 
DOE will focus its enforcement efforts on 
whether a contractor operates a nuclear fa-
cility consistent with the safety basis for the 
facility and, in particular, whether work is 
performed in accordance with the safety 
basis. 
2. As part of the approval process, DOE will 
review the content and quality of the safety 
basis documentation. DOE intends to use the 
approval process to assess the adequacy of a 
safety basis developed by a contractor to en-
sure that workers, the public, and the envi-
ronment are provided reasonable assurance 
of adequate protection from identified haz-
ards. Once approved by DOE, the safety basis 
documentation will not be subject to regu-
latory enforcement actions unless DOE de-
termines that the information which sup-
ports the documentation is not complete and 
accurate in all material respects, as required 
by 10 CFR 820.11. This is consistent with the 
DOE enforcement provisions and policy in 10 
CFR part 820. 
3. DOE does not intend the adoption of the 
safety basis requirements to affect the exist-
ing quality assurance requirements or the 
existing obligation of contractors to comply 
with the quality assurance requirements. In 
particular, in conjunction with the adoption 
of the safety basis requirements, DOE re-
vised the language in 10 CFR 830.122(e)(1) to 
make clear that hazard controls are part of 
the work processes to which a contractor 
and other persons must adhere when per-
forming work. This obligation to perform 
work consistent with hazard controls adopt-
ed to meet regulatory or contract require-
ments existed prior to the adoption of the 
safety basis requirements and is both con-
sistent with and independent of the safety 
basis requirements. 
4. A documented safety analysis must ad-
dress all hazards (that is, both radiological 
and nonradiological hazards) and the con-
trols necessary to provide adequate protec-
tion to the public, workers, and the environ-
ment from these hazards. Section 234A of the 
Atomic Energy Act only authorizes DOE to 
issue civil penalties for violations of require-
ments related to nuclear safety. Therefore, 
DOE will impose civil penalties for viola-
tions of the safety basis requirements (in-
cluding hazard controls) only if they are re-
lated to nuclear safety. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00536 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 11 ---
527 
Department of Energy Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
F. Documented Safety Analysis 
1. A documented safety analysis must dem-
onstrate the extent to which a nuclear facil-
ity can be operated safely with respect to 
workers, the public, and the environment. 
2. DOE expects a contractor to use a grad-
ed approach to develop a documented safety 
analysis and describe how the graded ap-
proach was applied. The level of detail, anal-
ysis, and documentation will reflect the 
complexity and hazards associated with a 
particular facility. Thus, the documented 
safety analysis for a simple, low hazard facil-
ity may be relatively short and qualitative 
in nature, while the documented safety anal-
ysis for a complex, high hazard facility may 
be quite elaborate and more quantitative. 
DOE will work with its contractors to ensure 
a documented safety analysis is appropriate 
for the facility for which it is being devel-
oped. 
3. Because DOE has ultimate responsibility 
for the safety of its facilities, DOE will re-
view each documented safety analysis: 
(i) As part of the initial submittal; 
(ii) When revisions are submitted as part of 
a positive USQ determination or major 
modification; 
(iii) If DOE has reason to believe a portion 
of the safety basis to be inadequate, or; 
(iv) If DOE has reason to believe a portion 
of the safety basis has substantially 
changed. DOE will review the documented 
safety analysis to determine whether the 
rigor and detail of the documented safety 
analysis are appropriate for the complexity 
and hazards expected at the nuclear facility. 
In particular, DOE will evaluate the docu-
mented safety analysis by considering the 
extent to which the documented safety anal-
ysis: 
(A) Satisfies the provisions of the method-
ology used to prepare the documented safety 
analysis and 
(B) Adequately addresses the criteria set 
forth in 10 CFR 830.204(b). DOE will prepare a 
Safety Evaluation Report to document the 
results of its review of the documented safe-
ty analysis. A documented safety analysis 
must contain any conditions or changes re-
quired by DOE in the Safety Evaluation Re-
port. Generally, DOE’s review of the annual 
submittal may be limited to ensuring that 
the results of USQs have been adequately in-
corporated into the documented safety anal-
ysis. If additional changes are proposed by 
the contractor and included in the annual 
update that have not been previously ap-
proved by DOE or have not been evaluated as 
a part of the USQ process, DOE must review 
and approve these changes. DOE has the au-
thority to review the safety basis at any 
time. 
4. In most cases, the contract will provide 
the framework for specifying the method-
ology and schedule for developing a docu-
mented safety analysis. Table 1 sets forth ac-
ceptable methodologies for preparing a docu-
mented safety analysis. 
TABLE 1 
The contractor responsible for: May prepare its document safety analysis by: 
(1) A DOE reactor ....................................... Using the method in U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission Regulatory Guide  1.70, 
Standard Format and Content of Safety Analysis Reports for Nuclear Power 
Plants, or successor document. 
(2) A DOE nonreactor nuclear facility ......... Using the method in DOE–STD–3009, Change Notice No. 1, January 2000, Prepa-
ration Guide for U.S. Department of Energy Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Safety 
Analysis Reports, July 1994, or successor document. 
(3) A DOE nuclear facility with a limited 
operational life.
Using the method in either: 
(i) DOE–STD–3009–, Change Notice No. 1, January 2000, or successor docu-
ment, or 
(ii) DOE–STD–3011–94, Guidance for Preparation of DOE 5480.22 (TSR) and 
DOE 5480.23 (SAR) Implementation Plans, November 1994, or successor 
document. 
(4) The deactivation or the transition sur-
veillance and maintenance of a DOE nu-
clear facility.
Using the method in either: 
(i) DOE–STD–3009, Change Notice No. 1, January 2000, or successor docu-
ment, or 
(ii) DOE–STD–3011–94 or successor document. 
(5) The decommissioning of a DOE nu-
clear facility.
(i) Using the method in DOE–STD–1120–98, Integration of Environment, Safety, 
and Health into Facility Disposition Activities, May 1998, or successor document; 
(ii) Using the provisions in 29 CFR 1910.120 (or 29 CFR 1926.65 for construction 
activities) for developing Safety and Health Programs, Work Plans, Health and 
Safety Plans, and Emergency Response Plans to address public safety, as well 
as worker safety; and 
(iii) Deriving hazard controls based on the Safety and Health Programs, the Work 
Plans, the Health and Safety Plans, and the Emergency Response Plans. 
(6) A DOE environmental restoration activ-
ity that involves either work not done 
within a permanent structure or the de-
commissioning of a facility with only low- 
level residual fixed radioactivity.
(i) Using the method in DOE–STD–1120–98 or successor document, and 
(ii) Using the provisions in 29 CFR 1910.120 (or 29 CFR 1926.65 for construction 
activities) for developing a Safety and Health Program and a site-specific Health 
and Safety Plan (including elements for Emergency Response Plans, conduct of 
operations, training and qualifications, and maintenance management). 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00537 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 12 ---
528 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
TABLE 1—Continued 
The contractor responsible for: May prepare its document safety analysis by: 
(7) A DOE nuclear explosive facility and 
the nuclear explosive operations con-
ducted therein.
Developing its documented safety analysis in two pieces: 
(i) A Safety Analysis Report for the nuclear facility that considers the generic 
nuclear explosive operations and is prepared in accordance with DOE– 
STD–3009, Change Notice No. 1, January 2000, or successor document, 
and 
(ii) A Hazard Analysis Report for the specific nuclear explosive operations pre-
pared in accordance with DOE–STD–3016–99, Hazards Analysis Reports 
for Nuclear Explosive Operations, February 1999, or successor document. 
(8) A DOE Hazard Category 3 nonreactor 
nuclear facility.
Using the methods in Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5 of DOE–STD–3009, Change Notice 
No. 1, January 2000, or successor document to address in a simplified fashion: 
(i) The basic description of the facility/activity and its operations, including 
safety structures, systems, and components; 
(ii) A qualitative hazards analysis; and 
(iii) The hazard controls (consisting primarily of inventory limits and safety 
management programs) and their bases. 
(9) Transportation activities ......................... (i) Preparing a Safety Analysis Report for Packaging in accordance with D OE–O– 
460.1A, Packaging and Transportation Safety, October 2, 1996, or successor 
document and 
(ii) Preparing a Transportation Safety Document in accordance with DOE–G– 
460.1–1, Implementation Guide for Use with DOE O 460.1A, Packaging and 
Transportation Safety, June 5, 1997, or successor document. 
(10) Transportation and onsite transfer of 
nuclear explosives, nuclear components, 
Naval nuclear fuel elements, Category I 
and Category II special nuclear mate-
rials, special assemblies, and other ma-
terials of national security.
(i) Preparing a Safety Analysis Report for Packaging in accordance with DOE–O– 
461.1, Packaging and Transportation of Materials of National Security Interest, 
September 29, 2000, or successor document and 
(ii) Preparing a Transportation Safety Document in accordance with DOE–M– 
461.1–1, Packaging and Transfer of Materials of National Security Interest Man-
ual, September 29, 2000, or successor document. 
5. Table 1 refers to specific types of nuclear 
facilities. These references are not intended 
to constitute an exhaustive list of the spe-
cific types of nuclear facilities. Part 830 de-
fines nuclear facility broadly to include a re-
actor or a nonreactor nuclear facility where 
an activity is conducted for or on behalf of 
DOE and includes any related area, struc-
ture, facility, or activity to the extent nec-
essary to ensure proper implementation of 
the requirements established by this part. 
The only exceptions are those facilities spe-
cifically excluded such as accelerators. Table 
2 defines the terms referenced in Table 1 that 
are not defined in 10 CFR 830.3. 
TABLE 2 
For purposes of Table 1: Means: 
(1) Deactivation ........................................... The process of placing a facility in a stable and known condition, i ncluding the re-
moval of hazardous and radioactive materials. 
(2) Decontamination .................................... The removal or reduction of residual radioactive and hazardous materials  by me-
chanical, chemical, or other techniques to achieve a stated objective or end con-
dition. 
(3) Decommissioning .................................. Those actions taking place after deactivation of a nuclear facility to ret ire it from 
service and includes surveillance and maintenance, decontamination, and/or dis-
mantlement. 
(4) Environmental restoration activities ....... The process by which contaminated sites and facilities are identified and charac ter-
ized and by which existing contamination is contained, or removed and dis-
posed. 
(5) Generic nuclear explosive operation ..... A characterization that considers the collective attributes (such as special facili ty 
system requirements, physical weapon characteristics, or quantities and chem-
ical/physical forms of hazardous materials) for all projected nuclear explosive op-
erations to be conducted at a facility. 
(6) Nuclear explosive facility ....................... A nuclear facility at which nuclear operations and activities involving a nuclear ex-
plosive may be conducted. 
(7) Nuclear explosive operation .................. Any activity involving a nuclear explosive, including activities in which main -charge, 
high-explosive parts and pits are collocated. 
(8) Nuclear facility with a limited oper-
ational life.
A nuclear facility for which there is a short remaining operational period before 
ending the facility’s mission and initiating deactivation and decommissioning and 
for which there are no intended additional missions other than cleanup. 
(9) Specific nuclear explosive operation ..... A specific nuclear explosive subjected to the stipulated steps of an individual op er-
ation, such as assembly or disassembly. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00538 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 13 ---
529 
Department of Energy Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
TABLE 2—Continued 
For purposes of Table 1: Means: 
(10) Transition surveillance and mainte-
nance activities.
Activities conducted when a facility is not operating or during deactivation, decon-
tamination, and decommissioning operations when surveillance and maintenance 
are the predominant activities being conducted at the facility. These activities are 
necessary for satisfactory containment of hazardous materials and protection of 
workers, the public, and the environment. These activities include providing peri-
odic inspections, maintenance of structures, systems, and components, and ac-
tions to prevent the alteration of hazardous materials to an unsafe state. 
6. The contractor responsible for the design 
and construction of a new Hazard Category 1, 
2, or 3 DOE nuclear facility or a major modi-
fication to an existing Hazard Category 1, 2, 
or 3 DOE nuclear facility must prepare a pre-
liminary documented safety analysis. A pre-
liminary documented safety analysis can en-
sure that substantial costs and time are not 
wasted in constructing a nuclear facility 
that will not be acceptable to DOE. If a con-
tractor is required to prepare a preliminary 
documented safety analysis, the contractor 
must obtain DOE approval of the prelimi-
nary documented safety analysis prior to 
procuring materials or components or begin-
ning construction. DOE, however, may au-
thorize the contractor to perform limited 
procurement and construction activities 
without approval of a preliminary docu-
mented safety analysis if DOE determines 
that the activities are not detrimental to 
public health and safety and are in the best 
interests of DOE. DOE Order 420.1, or suc-
cessor document, sets forth acceptable nu-
clear safety design criteria for use in pre-
paring a preliminary documented safety 
analysis. As a general matter, DOE does not 
expect preliminary documented safety anal-
yses to be needed for activities that do not 
involve significant construction such as en-
vironmental restoration activities, decon-
tamination and decommissioning activities, 
specific nuclear explosive operations, or 
transition surveillance and maintenance ac-
tivities. 
G. Hazard Controls 
1. Hazard controls are measures to elimi-
nate, limit, or mitigate hazards to workers, 
the public, or the environment. They in-
clude: 
(i) Physical, design, structural, and engi-
neering features; 
(ii) Safety structures, systems, and compo-
nents; 
(iii) Safety management programs; 
(iv) Technical safety requirements; and 
(v) Other controls necessary to provide 
adequate protection from hazards. 
2. The types and specific characteristics of 
the safety management programs necessary 
for a DOE nuclear facility will be dependent 
on the complexity and hazards associated 
with the nuclear facility and the work being 
performed. In most cases, however, a con-
tractor should consider safety management 
programs covering topics such as quality as-
surance, procedures, maintenance, personnel 
training, conduct of operations, criticality 
safety, emergency preparedness, fire protec-
tion, waste management, and radiation pro-
tection. In general, DOE Orders set forth 
DOE’s expectations concerning specific top-
ics. For example, DOE Order 420.1, or suc-
cessor document provides DOE’s expecta-
tions with respect to fire protection and 
criticality safety. 
3. Safety structures, systems, and compo-
nents require formal definition of minimum 
acceptable performance in the documented 
safety analysis. This is accomplished by first 
defining a safety function, then describing 
the structure, systems, and components, 
placing functional requirements on those 
portions of the structures, systems, and com-
ponents required for the safety function, and 
identifying performance criteria that will 
ensure functional requirements are met. 
Technical safety requirements are developed 
to ensure the operability of the safety struc-
tures, systems, and components and define 
actions to be taken if a safety structure, sys-
tem, or component is not operable. 
4. Technical safety requirements establish 
limits, controls, and related actions nec-
essary for the safe operation of a nuclear fa-
cility. The exact form and contents of tech-
nical safety requirements will depend on the 
circumstances of a particular nuclear facil-
ity as defined in the documented safety anal-
ysis for the nuclear facility. As appropriate, 
technical safety requirements may have sec-
tions on: 
(i) Safety limits; 
(ii) Operating limits; 
(iii) Surveillance requirements; 
(iv) Administrative controls; 
(v) Use and application; and 
(vi) Design features. 
It may also have an appendix on the bases 
for the limits and requirements. DOE Guide 
423.1–1B, Implementation Guide for Use in 
Developing Technical Safety Requirements, 
or successor document, provides a complete 
description of what technical safety require-
ments should contain and how they should 
be developed and maintained. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00539 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 14 ---
530 
10 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) Pt. 830, Subpt. B, App. A 
5. DOE will examine and approve the tech-
nical safety requirements as part of pre-
paring the safety evaluation report and re-
viewing updates to the safety basis. As with 
all hazard controls, technical safety require-
ments must be kept current and reflect 
changes in the facility, the work and the 
hazards as they are analyzed in the docu-
mented safety analysis. In addition, DOE ex-
pects a contractor to maintain technical 
safety requirements, and other hazard con-
trols as appropriate, as controlled documents 
with an authorized users list. 
6. Table 3 sets forth DOE’s expectations 
concerning acceptable technical safety re-
quirements. 
TABLE 3 
As appropriate for a particular DOE 
nuclear facility, the section of the technical 
safety requirements on: 
Will provide information on: 
(1) Safety limits ........................................... The limits on process variables associated with those safety class physical bar-
riers, generally passive, that are necessary for the intended facility function and 
that are required to guard against the uncontrolled release of radioactive mate-
rials. The safety limit section describes, as precisely as possible, the parameters 
being limited, states the limit in measurable units (pressure, temperature, flow, 
etc.), and indicates the applicability of the limit. The safety limit section also de-
scribes the actions to be taken in the event that the safety limit is exceeded. 
These actions should first place the facility in the safe, stable condition attain-
able, including total shutdown (except where such action might reduce the mar-
gin of safety) or should verify that the facility already is safe and stable and will 
remain so. The technical safety requirement should state that the contractor 
must obtain DOE authorization to restart the nuclear facility following a violation 
of a safety limit. The safety limit section also establishes the steps and time lim-
its to correct the out-of-specification condition. 
(2) Operating limits ...................................... Those limits which are required to ensure the safe operation of a nuc lear facility. 
The operating limits section may include subsections on limiting control settings 
and limiting conditions for operation. 
(3) Limiting control settings ......................... The settings on safety systems that control process variables to prevent exceeding 
a safety limit. The limited control settings section normally contains the settings 
for automatic alarms and for the automatic or non-automatic initiation of protec-
tive actions related to those variables associated with the function of safety class 
structures, systems, or components if the safety analysis shows that they are re-
lied upon to mitigate or prevent an accident. The limited control settings section 
also identifies the protective actions to be taken at the specific settings chosen in 
order to correct a situation automatically or manually such that the related safety 
limit is not exceeded. Protective actions may include maintaining the variables 
within the requirements and repairing the automatic device promptly or shutting 
down the affected part of the process and, if required, the entire facility. 
(4) Limiting conditions for operations .......... The limits that represent the lowest functional capability or performance level  of 
safety structures, systems, and components required to perform an activity safe-
ly. The limiting conditions for operation section describes, as precisely as pos-
sible, the lowest functional capability or performance level of equipment required 
for continued safe operation of the facility. The limiting conditions for operation 
section also states the action to be taken to address a condition not meeting the 
limiting conditions for operation section. Normally this simply provides for the ad-
verse condition being corrected in a certain time frame and for further action if 
this is impossible. 
(5) Surveillance requirements ..................... Requirements relating to test, calibration, or inspection to assure that the nec-
essary operability and quality of safety structures, systems, and components is 
maintained; that facility operation is within safety limits; and that limiting control 
settings and limiting conditions for operation are met. If a required surveillance is 
not successfully completed, the contractor is expected to assume the systems or 
components involved are inoperable and take the actions defined by the tech-
nical safety requirement until the systems or components can be shown to be 
operable. If, however, a required surveillance is not performed within its required 
frequency, the contractor is allowed to perform the surveillance within 24 hours 
or the original frequency, whichever is smaller, and confirm operability. 
(6) Administrative controls .......................... Organization and management, procedures, recordkeeping, assessment, and re -
porting necessary to ensure safe operation of a facility consistent with the tech-
nical safety requirement. In general, the administrative controls section address-
es (i) the requirements associated with administrative controls (including those 
for reporting violations of the technical safety requirement); (ii) the staffing re-
quirements for facility positions important to safe conduct of the facility; and (iii) 
the commitments to the safety management programs identified in the docu-
mented safety analysis as necessary components of the safety basis for the fa-
cility. 
(7) Use and application provisions ............. The basic instructions for applying the safety restrictions contained in a techn ical 
safety requirement. The use and application section includes definitions of terms, 
operating modes, logical connectors, completion times, and frequency notations. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00540 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8002 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER

--- page 15 ---
531 
Department of Energy Pt. 835 
TABLE 3—Continued 
As appropriate for a particular DOE 
nuclear facility, the section of the technical 
safety requirements on: 
Will provide information on: 
(8) Design features ..................................... Design features of the facility that, if altered or modified, would hav e a significant 
effect on safe operation. 
(9) Bases appendix ..................................... The reasons for the safety limits, operating limits, and associated surv eillance re-
quirements in the technical safety requirements. The statements for each limit or 
requirement shows how the numeric value, the condition, or the surveillance ful-
fills the purpose derived from the safety documentation. The primary purpose for 
describing the basis of each limit or requirement is to ensure that any future 
changes to the limit or requirement is done with full knowledge of the original in-
tent or purpose of the limit or requirement. 
H. Unreviewed Safety Questions 
1. The USQ process is an important tool to 
evaluate whether changes affect the safety 
basis. A contractor must use the USQ proc-
ess to ensure that the safety basis for a DOE 
nuclear facility is not undermined by 
changes in the facility, the work performed, 
the associated hazards, or other factors that 
support the adequacy of the safety basis. 
2. The USQ process permits a contractor to 
make physical and procedural changes to a 
nuclear facility and to conduct tests and ex-
periments without prior approval, provided 
these changes do not cause a USQ. The USQ 
process provides a contractor with the flexi-
bility needed to conduct day-to-day oper-
ations by requiring only those changes and 
tests with a potential to impact the safety 
basis (and therefore the safety of the nuclear 
facility) be approved by DOE. This allows 
DOE to focus its review on those changes sig-
nificant to safety. The USQ process helps 
keep the safety basis current by ensuring ap-
propriate review of and response to situa-
tions that might adversely affect the safety 
basis. 
3. DOE Guide 424.1–1B Chg 2, Implementa-
tion Guide for Use in Addressing Unreviewed 
Safety Question Requirements, or successor 
document provides DOE’s expectations for a 
USQ process. The contractor must obtain 
DOE approval of its procedure used to imple-
ment the USQ process. The contractor is al-
lowed to make editorial and format changes 
to its USQ procedure while maintaining DOE 
approval. 
I. Functions and Responsibilities 
1. The DOE Management Official for a DOE 
nuclear facility (that is, the Assistant Sec-
retary, the Assistant Administrator, or the 
Office Director who is primarily responsible 
for the management of the facility) has pri-
mary responsibility within DOE for ensuring 
that the safety basis for the facility is ade-
quate and complies with the safety basis re-
quirements of Part 830. The DOE Manage-
ment Official is responsible for ensuring the 
timely and proper— 
(i) Review of all safety basis documents 
submitted to DOE; and 
(ii) Preparation of a safety evaluation re-
port concerning the safety basis for a facil-
ity. 
2. DOE will maintain a public list on the 
internet that provides the status of the safe-
ty basis for each Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 
DOE nuclear facility and, to the extent prac-
ticable, provides information on how to ob-
tain a copy of the safety basis and related 
documents for a facility. 
PART 835—OCCUPATIONAL 
RADIATION PROTECTION 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
Sec. 
835.1 Scope. 
835.2 Definitions. 
835.3 General rule. 
835.4 Radiological units. 
Subpart B—Management and 
Administrative Requirements 
835.101 Radiation protection programs. 
835.102 Internal audits. 
835.103 Education, training and skills. 
835.104 Written procedures. 
Subpart C—Standards for Internal and 
External Exposure 
835.201 [Reserved] 
835.202 Occupational dose limits for general 
employees. 
835.203 Combining internal and external 
equivalent doses. 
835.204 Planned special exposures. 
835.205 Determination of compliance for 
non-uniform exposure of the skin. 
835.206 Limits for the embryo/fetus. 
835.207 Occupational dose limits for minors. 
835.208 Limits for members of the public en-
tering a controlled area. 
835.209 Concentrations of radioactive mate-
rial in air. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:45 Mar 25, 2024 Jkt 262033 PO 00000 Frm 00541 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8006 Q:\10\10V4.TXT PC31sfrattini on LAPCK6H6L3 with DISTILLER
