--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety & Security 
DOE O 426.2A 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, DC 
 
Approved: 1-29-2024 
Chg 1 (AdminChg): 5-30-2024 
SUBJECT: PERSONNEL SELECTION, TRAINING, QUALIFICATION, AND 
CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DOE NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE. 
a. This Order establishes selection, training, qualification, and certification 
requirements for all contractor personnel who, by action or inaction, can affect 
compliance with the safety basis of a Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 nuclear facilities.  
b. This Order updates and consolidates DOE’s training requirements to ensure a well-
trained nuclear facility organization.  
c. Implementation of all requirements in this Order constitutes an acceptable method 
of complying with 10 CFR § 830.122, Criterion 2 – Management/Personnel 
Training and Qualification, for the performance of work activities described in this 
Order. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES. This revision cancels DOE Order (O) 426.2, Personnel 
Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear 
Facilities, dated 4-21-2010.  
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. The Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory commitment 
is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or substitute a 
new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability. This Order applies to all departmental elements, 
including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), responsible for 
the operation of Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities. The NNSA 
Administrator will assure NNSA employees and contractors comply with the 
responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this Order will be construed to 
interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of 
Public Law 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act, to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary.  
DOE Contractors. Th e CRD for this Order (Attachment 1) must be inserted in all 
contracts for Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 DOE nuclear facilities. Except for the 
equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c., the CRD sets forth requirements of

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 426.2A 
  1-29-2024 
this Order that will apply to contracts that include the CRD. The Officials 
identified in paragraph 5 of this Order are responsible for notifying the Contracting 
Officer of the affected contracts. Once notified, the Contracting Officer is 
responsible for incorporating the CRD into each affected contract via the laws, 
regulations, and DOE directives clause of the contract, or via negotiation and 
modification, as appropriate. 
b. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 426.2A. Equivalencies and exemptions to 
this Order are processed in accordance with (IAW) DOE O 251.1, Departmental 
Directives Program, current version. Central Technical Authority concurrence is 
required for both exemptions and equivalencies to this Order. 
(1) E xemption. This Order does not apply to activities that exclusively 
involve transportation or offering transportation of hazardous materials 
(including radioactive materials), substances, and wastes. 
(2) E quivalency. IAW  the responsibilities and authorities assigned by 
Executive Order 12344, codified at 50 U.S.C. §§ 2406 and 2511, and to 
ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion 
Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors will implement 
and oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for 
activities under the Deputy Administrator’s authority, as deemed 
appropriate. 
4. RE QUIREMENTS . 
a. A selection, training, qualification, and certification program (hereafter "training 
and qualification program"), as described in this Order, must be implemented at 
new and existing Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities. 
b. Heads of DOE field organizations and NNSA field element managers must review 
and approve (1) contractor implementation documentation showing compliance 
with this Order, including its CRD; and (2) contractor procedures for granting 
relief from any required aspect of a training and qualification program. 
c. Heads of DOE field organizations and NNSA field element managers are required 
to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the nuclear facility training and 
qualification program(s) (either through contractor or federal reviews) at least once 
in a three-year interval.   
DOE‐STD‐1070‐94 aids in developing an assessment program to provide 
oversight of the training and qualification program activities.  The assessments 
must be scheduled and conducted IAW DOE O 226.1B, Implementation of 
Department of Energy Oversight Policy, or its successor Order, and DOE G 226.1‐
2A, Federal Line Management Oversight of Department of Energy Nuclear 
Facilities.  
d. The following DOE regulations and directives provide requirements and 
procedures on how training records and information are to be handled and

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 426.2A 
1-29-2024 3  
protected: 10 CFR Part 1008, Records Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act); 
DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version; and DOE 
O 471.7, Controlled Unclassified Information, current version. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Program Secretarial Officers/NNSA Administrator. 
(1) Exercise line management responsibility and accountability for nuclear 
facility training and qualification programs. 
(2) Ensure resources are provided for developing, implementing, and 
maintaining nuclear facility personnel training and qualification programs. 
(3) Review and approve the evaluation of the need for a simulator at Category 
A test and research reactors. 
b. Director of the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security. 
(1) Develop and coordinate proposed new or revised policies, directives, 
requirements, guidance, and technical standards related to this Order and 
CRD. 
(2) Provide technical guidance on compliance with the provisions of this 
Order and CRD and provide policy implementation advice and assistance. 
(3) Provide input on technical guidance of DOE safety policy as set forth in 
this Order to the Central Technical Authorities. 
(4) Provide advice on requests for exemptions and equivalencies from the 
requirements of this Order. 
c. Director, Office of Enterprise Assessments. Plan and conduct assessments to 
determine compliance with the requirements of this Order, IAW DOE O 227.1, 
Independent Oversight Program, current version.  
d. D OE Heads of Field Organizations and NNSA Field Element Managers. 
(1) Ensure an adequate number of persons with responsibility for oversight of 
the contractor’s nuclear facility training and qualification program. 
Identify and submit resource requests to the Program Secretarial Officers 
to provide adequate oversight of the implementation of personnel 
selection, training, qualification, and certification programs. 
(2) Provide Contracting Officers with necessary information and direction for 
procurements (existing or planned) requiring application of the CRD of 
this Order.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 426.2A 
  1-29-2024 
(3) Evaluate and approve contractor implementation documentation, which 
includes the Training Implementation Document (TID) (Training 
Implementation Matrix (TIM) or succeeding Training Program Plan (TPP) 
or Training Program Description (TPD)) as described in the definitions. 
(4) Evaluate and approve the contractor procedures established to release an 
individual from portions of a training and qualification program based on 
the individual’s prior education, experience, training, and/or 
qualification/certification.  
(5) Conduct oversight activities to evaluate the implementation of the 
requirements of the CRD and the overall effectiveness of the Nuclear 
Facility Training and Qualification program. An assessment of the 
program must be performed at least once every three years.   
(a) The oversight activities must include: An evaluation of the 
contractor's implementation documentation to ensure DOE has 
reviewed and approved all major changes. 
(b) Ensuring the entire scope of DOE-STD-1070-94, if applicable, is 
addressed through contractor assessments. 
(c) Ensuring that the Training and Qualification Program is developed 
and implemented using the Systematic Approach to Training 
(SAT) process. 
(d) Ensuring that each of the basic elements of the SAT process is 
assessed. 
(e) This evaluation must include a verification of the implementation 
of the applicable requirements of this CRD and criteria from the 
DOE-STD-1070-94. Consistent with DOE O 226.1, the scope of 
this evaluation must be determined based on performance 
information from the contractor assurance system and federal 
oversight activities. Additionally, the basis for the scope of this 
evaluation must be documented.  
(f) Evaluate the certification and recertification of shift supervisors, 
senior reactor operators (SROs), reactor operators, and fissionable 
material handlers at Category A reactors. The Field Element 
manager determines whether an evaluation of the certification and 
recertification of these positions at other nuclear facilities needs to 
be performed based on facility hazards and operational complexity.  
This evaluation includes:  
1 Periodic and random review of individual training records

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 426.2A 
1-29-2024 5  
2 Periodic observations of oral examinations, walkthroughs, 
and operational evaluations 
 
3 Periodic spot checks of initial and continuing training 
classes, performance of practical factors, administration of 
oral examinations and other training and qualification 
program materials 
(6) Approve, on a case-by-case basis, contractor requests for extension of 
certification 
(7) Approve, on a case-by-case basis, assignment of individuals who do not 
meet the education and/or experience requirements for a position 
(8) Review and approve contractor assessments of the need for a simulator at 
Hazard Category 1/Category A test and research reactors 
e. Contracting Officers. 
(1) Upon notification of its applicability, incorporate the CRD into applicable 
contracts that contain Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation 
(DEAR) clause 970.5204-2, Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives, via 
the process set forth in DEAR clause 970.5204-2.  
(2) Upon notification of its applicability, incorporate applicable CRD 
requirements in the contract terms and conditions of new and existing 
contracts not subject to DEAR clause 970.5204-2, as appropriate.  
6. INVOKED TECHNICAL STANDARDS. IAW the applicability and conditions 
described within this Order, the following DOE technical standard is invoked as a 
required evaluation method in this Order. Any technical standard or industry standard 
mentioned in or referenced by this Order, but is not included in the paragraph below, is 
not invoked by this Order. Note: DOE O 251.1, current version, provides a definition for 
"invoked technical standard." DOE-STD-1070-94, Criteria for Evaluation of Nuclear 
Facility Training Programs, is required to be used in performing oversight and 
systematic evaluations of training and qualification programs at DOE nuclear facilities. 
See Section 4.c. and CRD Chapter I, Section 3.c. for applicable requirements. 
7. R EFERENCES. See Attachment 2.  
8. DEFINITIONS. See Attachment 3.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 426.2A 
  1-29-2024 
9. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order may be addressed to the Office of Quality 
Assurance and Nuclear Safety Management Programs at nuclearsafety@hq.doe.gov. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 DAVID M. TURK  
 Deputy Secretary  
Logo 
added 
after 
approval

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-1 (and Page 1-2) 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (CRD) 
DOE O 426.2A, PERSONNEL SELECTION, QUALIFICATION,  
AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR DOE NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD consistent with applicable federal laws. The contractor is responsible 
for flowing down the requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent 
necessary to ensure the contractor’s compliance with the requirements. The Order establishes 
selection, training, qualification, and certification requirements for all contractor personnel who, 
by action or inaction, can affect compliance with the safety basis of Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities. 
1. Chapter I of this CRD establishes general training and qualification program 
requirements for all personnel who can impact the safety basis through their involvement 
in the operation, maintenance, and technical support of Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities. 
2. Chapter II of this CRD establishes additional training and qualification program 
requirements for all personnel who can impact the safety basis through their involvement 
in the operation, maintenance, and technical support of Hazard Category 2 and 3 
nonreactor nuclear facilities.  
3. Chapter III of this CRD establishes additional training and qualification program 
requirements for all personnel who can impact the safety basis through their involvement 
in the operation, maintenance, and technical support of Hazard Category 1/Category A 
and Hazard Category 2/Category B reactor nuclear facilities. The requirements of 
Chapter II are not applicable to these facilities, unless specifically cited in Chapter III.

--- page 8 ---


--- page 9 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER I 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1. TRAINING ORGANIZATION. The contractor must establish one or more organizations 
responsible for the training of all contractor personnel subject to this Order. This 
organization will be expected to (a) provide support to Management to ensure personnel 
are qualified to perform assigned work safely and effectively, and (b) document the 
responsibilities, qualifications, and authority of training organization personnel.  
2. I MPLEMENTATION DOCUMENTATION .  
a. The contractor must prepare a Training Implementation Document (TID) (i.e., 
Training Implementation Matrix (TIM) or succeeding Training Program Plan 
(TPP) or Training Program Description (TPD)) that accomplishes the following 
objectives: 
(1) Identifies which sections of this CRD are applicable to a particular facility 
(2) Defines and describes the application of requirements for personnel 
selection, qualification, certification, and training requirements 
(3) Defines the organization, planning, and administration of the program 
(4) Sets forth the responsibility, authority, and methods for conducting 
training 
(5) Provides justification for not implementing certain CRD provisions 
(6) Section 4.b. of this Order requires that DOE or NNSA review and approve 
this documentation 
b. Contractors having approved implementation documentation at the time this CRD 
is incorporated into their contracts are expected to make any needed revisions to 
comply with the requirements of this CRD within 90 days of the date this CRD is 
inserted into the contract. Contractors having approved implementation 
documentation are expected to make any needed revisions to comply with the 
requirements of this CRD and submit it to DOE for review and approval. If no 
revisions are needed, a letter to that effect may be submitted to DOE within 90 
days of the date this CRD is inserted into the contract. 
3. TRAINING PROCESS. 
a. A training and qualification program must be established at a minimum for 
operations, maintenance, and technical personnel, and any others with the potential 
to impact the safe operation of the facility using the "systematic approach to 
training" (SAT) process. The basic elements of this process are:  
(1) An analysis of the jobs to be performed (job/task analysis)

--- page 10 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-2 1-29-2024 
 
(2) Design of learning objectives derived from the analysis of the job that 
describe desired performance after training 
(3) Development of lesson plans and other training materials based on the 
learning objectives 
(4) Implementation of the training 
(5) Evaluation of trainee mastery of the objectives during training 
(6) Evaluation and revision of the training as needed based on observance of 
trained personnel performing their duties 
(7) Monitoring of organizational performance to determine if any weaknesses 
in performance are linked to parallel weaknesses in the training and 
qualification program 
(8) Guidance on the design and implementation of training and qualification 
programs is provided in DOE-HDBK-1078-94, Training Program 
Handbook: A Systematic Approach to Training 
b. The training and qualification program must be developed using a graded 
approach. Use of the graded approach will ensure the level of detail and content of 
the training and qualification program will be appropriate to the hazards involved 
and risk associated with the operation of the facility or activity. Accordingly, the 
level of detail and content of the training and qualification program, and associated 
documents or procedures, must reflect the personnel selection, training, 
qualification, and certification that are required at these facilities. 
c. Every three years a contractor must perform a systematic evaluation of its training 
and qualification programs IAW DOE-STD-1070-94, Criteria for Evaluation of 
Nuclear Facility Training Programs.  The evaluation must include a review of the 
training implementation documentation to ensure the document(s) reflect current 
facility conditions/operations and meets the requirements of this CRD. The 
evaluation may be conducted in phases over a three-year period. All sections must 
be evaluated over a three-year period. 
d. The contractor’s change control processes must be integrated with training to 
ensure any changes to facility, processes, Documented Safety Analyses (DSAs), 
Technical Safety Requirements (TSRs), Justifications for Continued Operation 
(JCO), procedures, or regulatory changes are evaluated to determine their effect on 
the existing Training and Qualification Programs. Changes to the TID require 
DOE/NNSA approval. There are many conditions in a Training Implementation 
Document that, if changed, would require a revision to the training and 
qualification program documentation (e.g., facility system changes, changes to 
operator positions, etc.) in addition to changes to the safety basis documentation.  
e. Training personnel as a team, stressing team communications and interaction, may 
be used where job functions require team activities and solutions.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-3 
 
f. Training and qualification programs must consist of a combination of classroom-
type, on-the-job training, simulator, and laboratory training as it applies to the 
position. Classroom-type training may include lectures, seminars, table-top 
exercises, computer-based training, and structured self-study activities. Training 
and qualification programs may employ multiple methods to accommodate 
individual learning styles and training methods best suited for delivery of the 
content being provided. Qualification/certification programs may not be limited 
exclusively to self-study using computers or written materials.  
g. Personnel in the process of completing training on tasks and positions for which 
they are not yet fully qualified must work under the direct supervision of someone 
who is qualified; however, they may independently perform individual tasks or job 
assignments for which they are qualified. Contractor management must not place 
unqualified personnel in a position that requires them to make decisions or take 
actions when their work could affect facility safety.  
4. PERSONNEL SELECTION. 
a. Selection Process. The contractor must establish a process for selection and 
assignment of "Functional Level" personnel as shown in Chapters II and III 
(Tables 1, 2, and 3). This process includes factors such as background, experience, 
education, and medical examination (as applicable), and may be based on the 
ability of the person to meet job performance requirements. Selection of personnel 
may involve a selection test. 
b. E ducation and Experience Requirements . Education and experience requirements 
for operating organization personnel are intended to ensure these persons have, or 
will acquire, the knowledge and skills needed to operate and maintain DOE 
nuclear facilities and related support systems under all conditions safely and 
reliably. Tables and supporting notes in Chapters II and III identify the minimum 
education and experience requirements for operating organization personnel and 
managers. Management level personnel must meet the requirements shown prior to 
assuming the duties of the assigned position. Except when noted otherwise, a 
baccalaureate degree is required to be in engineering or a related science or 
technology. 
c. A lternatives to Education . Education requirements may include a baccalaureate 
degree, or high school diploma. The type and level of degree/diploma required is a 
function of the job responsibilities of the position. Persons who do not possess the 
desired formal educational requirements may be qualified based on other factors 
such as experience or non-academic training. Qualification by alternative factors is 
a judgment decision made by the contractor in each case and must be fully 
documented. The following alternative qualification methods may be considered in 
making such decisions: 
(1) High School Diploma: passing a General Education Development (GED) 
test. 
(2) Baccalaureate Degree. Three optional paths:

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-4 1-29-2024 
 
(a) Possession of a current Professional Engineer’s license relevant to 
the position being filled; or 
(b) Successful completion of 80 semester credit hours of the technical 
portions of an engineering, engineering technology, or related 
science program [i.e., calculus, engineering physics, chemistry 
(above the freshman level), and engineering or science] may be 
substituted for the baccalaureate degree. Successful completion 
must be determined by a transcript or certification by an institution 
or program accredited by an accrediting organization recognized 
by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation or the United 
States Department of Education. The courses must be in 
appropriate technical subjects relevant to the position being filled; 
or 
(c) Experience substitution for education: 
1 For reactor facilities or nonreactor nuclear facilities deemed 
to need a higher rigor due to the complexity/hazards 
associated with the facility:  Related experience may be 
substituted for education at the rate of 6 semester credit 
hours for each year of experience up to a maximum of 60 
hours of credit. 
2 F or other  nonreactor nuclear facilities:  Related experience 
may be substituted for education at the rate of 2 years’ 
experience to the applicable position for one year of a 
baccalaureate degree (i.e., eight years’ related experience is 
equivalent to a baccalaureate degree). 
d. Alte rnatives to Experience . On a case-by-case basis, a contractor may accept 
experience in general engineering design, construction, and operations as 
qualifying nuclear experience. Acceptance of such experience must be documented 
by the contractor. 
Limitations:  
(a) Formal education may not substitute for more than 50 percent of 
experience requirements. 
(b) Job-related training may be claimed as the equivalent to no more 
than two years’ nuclear experience. 
e. Exemption from Experience/Education Requirements. If an individual does not 
meet the entry level experience requirements contained in the CRD tables and 
cannot satisfy the alternative education and/or experience provisions, individuals 
may still be assigned to that position based on consideration of the collective 
nuclear experience and the strength and balance of the overall operating 
organization. In such cases, the contractor must provide documented justification

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-5 
 
to the DOE Head of Field Organization or the NNSA Field Element Manager for 
approval prior to the assignment. 
5. GENERAL EMPLOYEE TRAINING.  
a. All personnel requiring unescorted access to Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 nuclear 
facilities must be trained on the topics listed below, as applicable, or be 
continuously escorted by an employee already cleared for access. This training 
may be given for site-wide access or for separate facilities. Required topics:  
(1) General description of facility 
(2) Access-related policies (to include escort duties), procedures and 
instructions 
(3) Radiological hazards 
(4) Site/facility emergency plans 
(5) Industrial hazards 
(6) Fire response protocol/fire protection program 
(7) Security requirements 
b. Completion of access training requires satisfactory performance on an 
examination, which may be written, computer, or web based. The examination 
must be of sufficient scope and rigor to demonstrate the employee has adequate 
knowledge to independently access the facility safely. 
c. Changes to information provided in access training must be evaluated for potential 
revision to the training and for periodic refresher training. 
6. QUALIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION. 
a. Qualification and certification have different requirements for management, 
documentation, and records. Not all qualifications require certifications. All 
certifications require qualification.  
b. Initial Qualification and Certification. The program leading to 
qualification/certification must be governed by written procedures that include 
requirements for documented assessment of the person’s knowledge, skills, and 
abilities. The contractor must define qualification/certification requirements for 
personnel in each of the functional levels (Tables 1, 2, and 3) based on the criteria 
contained in Chapter II or III as applicable. The contractor must keep an accurate 
and up-to-date record indicating whether a person is qualified or certified and 
stating when the qualification/certification expires. 
c. S ubcontractor Personnel . Job qualifications stated in this Order apply to both 
contractor and subcontractor personnel. It is the operating contractor’s

--- page 14 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-6 1-29-2024 
 
responsibility to ensure subcontractor and temporary personnel performing 
specialized activities, such as radiation protection, radiography, welding, and in-
service inspection, are qualified to perform the assigned tasks. Any one of the 
following methods may be used to confirm subcontractor qualification: 
(1) The satisfactory result of an audit of subcontractor qualification and 
training records. 
(2) The operating contractor’s previous verification (within two years) of the 
subcontractor employee’s ability to perform assigned tasks safely and 
efficiently. 
(3) The subcontractor employee’s successful completion of those segments of 
the operating organization’s qualification program is considered pertinent 
to accomplishing the tasks to be performed. This may include 
demonstrating proficiency. 
(4) As stated in other sections of this CRD, a worker that cannot be qualified 
using any of these options is required to work under the direct supervision 
of personnel qualified to perform the activity or task. 
7. OPERATORS AND OPERATIONS SUPERVISORS. 
a. Operator training must cover all areas fundamental to the candidate’s assigned 
tasks. The training and qualification program will include the following sections as 
applicable: 
(1) A core of fundamental science and engineering subjects as determined by 
an analysis for the position(s). The subjects may be provided as 
independent courses or as part of facility systems training. Examples 
include, but are not limited to: Instrumentation and Controls, Mechanical 
Science, Electrical Science, Heat Transfer, Fluid Flow, Thermodynamics, 
Nuclear Science and Criticality Control, and Materials Science.  
(2) Classroom, simulator (as applicable), and on-the-job training will cover: 
(a) Facility or operation systems (normal, abnormal, and emergency 
systems), including principles of operation, components, functions, 
instrumentation, signals, interlocks, failure modes, system 
interfaces, and automatic and manual features 
(b) Principles of facility operation, including the process involved and 
technical terminology for the chemical, physical, and metallurgical 
reactions 
(c) Normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures 
(d) Emergency systems, including components, functions, and 
limitations

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-7 
 
(e) Criticality safety principles, controls, and specifications 
(f) Radiation control practices 
(g) Safety basis documentation (DSA, hazard controls, including 
TSRs) 
(h) Conduct of operations 
b. The operations supervisor training and qualification program must cover in greater 
technical depth the same subject categories and on-the-job training specified for 
operators, to the extent appropriate. 
c. Qualification of operators and operations supervisors is based on completion of a 
comprehensive written examination and operational evaluation. Certification of 
operators and operations supervisors is based on completion of qualification 
requirements and an oral examination. 
d. Qualification or certification of operators and operations supervisors is valid for up 
to two years, but may be revoked earlier for cause, such as medical problems or 
performance deficiencies. Qualification may be granted only after determining all 
requirements have been met. 
8. TECHNICIANS AND MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL. 
a. Technicians and maintenance personnel must be qualified to perform the task or 
tasks associated with their specialty or work under the direct supervision of 
personnel qualified to perform the activity or task.  
b. Technicians and maintenance personnel whose work involves engineered safety 
features must be trained on the importance of safety significant and safety class 
structures, systems, and components.  
c. Technician and maintenance personnel qualification must include performance 
evaluations, such as Job Performance Measures. Written examinations may be 
administered to personnel in these positions as applicable.  
d. Training and qualification program content for RCT must be IAW the 
requirements contained in10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection; 
and DOE-STD-1098-2017, Radiological Control. Passing an oral examination 
may also be required for RCT positions (see Part 6 of DOE-STD-1098-2017). 
9. OPERATIONS/ENGINEERING MANAGERS AND TECHNICAL PERSONNEL 
SUPPORTING NUCLEAR FACILITIES. Personnel are considered qualified by virtue of 
meeting the education and experience requirements for the position and by completing 
applicable position-specific training.  
a. Required training topics for operations and engineering managers: 
(1) Applicable facility safety basis documents

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-8 1-29-2024 
 
(2) Facility processes and systems 
(3) Additional topics listed in Section 7.a. as relevant to the position and 
(4) Nuclear Safety Culture. 
b. Required training topics for technical personnel as applicable: 
(1) Facility fundamentals: systems, components, and operations 
(2) Applicable DOE Orders and standards 
(3) Applicable consensus codes and standards 
(4) Safety basis documentation (DSA, hazard controls, including TSRs) and 
the Unreviewed Safety Question (USQ) process 
(5) Criticality safety program 
(6) Radiological protection program  
(7) Quality assurance program  
(8) Material, maintenance, and configuration management 
(9) Nuclear safety culture 
c. Continuing training and professional development programs may be established to 
meet the needs of the individual and the position. Satisfactory performance of their 
assigned duties and assessment of individual performance such as that which is 
typically included in personal performance appraisals may be used to document 
and inform the determination of continued satisfactory performance. 
10. EXAMINATIONS. 
a. Written Examinations. Written examinations must contain a sampling of the 
knowledge identified in and derived from the learning objectives resulting from 
the SAT process.  
b. O perational Evaluation . The operational evaluation is a facility walkthrough that 
includes system and/or component operation. The evaluation may include a 
simulation of operations, during which the candidate is observed and questioned 
regarding procedures, safety implications, and TSRs. Operational evaluations 
must require the candidate to demonstrate the ability to perform a sampling of the 
following actions based on job-specific training requirements: 
(1) Execute pre-startup procedures 
(2) Operate controls that could affect reactivity or criticality safety

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-9 
 
(3) Operate controls to control the facility in all operating modes 
(4) Identify annunciators and condition-indicating signals and perform 
appropriate remedial action; 
(5) Identify instrumentation systems and the significance of associated 
instrument readings 
(6) Operate heat removal systems and explain relationships between proper 
operation of these systems and the operation of the facility 
(7) Operate auxiliary and emergency systems, including controls that could 
affect criticality safety or confinement of radioactive and hazardous 
materials 
(8) Demonstrate or describe the use and function of radiation monitoring 
systems, including fixed radiation monitors and alarms, portable survey 
instruments, and personnel monitoring systems 
(9) Demonstrate knowledge of significant radiation hazards, including 
permissible levels of personnel exposure 
(10) Respond to abnormal events 
c. Oral Examinations for Certified Positions. 
(1) Oral examinations may be conducted as a one-on-one walkthrough 
(potentially during the operational evaluation) or by an oral board 
empaneled by facility managers and knowledgeable and/or qualified 
personnel. For Category A Reactors the oral exam must be separate from 
the operational evaluation. 
(2) Oral examinations require the candidate to demonstrate operational 
knowledge. The oral examination must be tailored to evaluate the 
candidate’s operational knowledge and organizational awareness as related 
to the normal operating environment and abnormal conditions. Topics may 
include operating philosophy, use of procedures, shift and relief turnovers, 
and verification of system and equipment status. 
11. EXCEPTIONS TO TRAINING REQUIREMENTS. 
a. The operating contractor must establish a procedure for documenting and granting 
exceptions to initial training and qualification program requirements. This 
procedure requires the written approval of the DOE Head of Field Organization or 
the NNSA Field Element Manager, per section 5.d.(3). 
b. A request for an exception action includes: 
(1) Name of the requester;

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-10 1-29-2024 
 
(2) Specific subject for which the exception is requested, and; 
(3) Justification.  
c. Successful completion of equivalent training and qualification programs 
comparable in content and performance standards by personnel placed in the 
training and qualification program may receive substitute equivalency credit for 
training on an individual case basis. Exceptions to training may be based in part on 
a review of previous training records. 
d. Persons who believe they have comparable knowledge or skills may challenge the 
requirement to attend training. Challenge examinations (written or performance) 
may be administered and must be sufficiently comprehensive to adequately test the 
learning objectives stated in the training. The use of challenge tests is not 
considered an exception to the training.  
12. CERTIFICATION PROCESS. 
a. Certification: 
(1) The processes by which contractor management endorses and documents, 
in writing, the satisfactory completion of qualification requirements.  
(2) Follows the completion of the qualification program for those positions 
identified as requiring certification.  
(3) Differs from qualification in that it requires an oral examination and 
official contractor management endorsement. 
b. Written procedures govern the certification process. 
(1) Fissionable material handlers and fissionable material handler supervisors 
must be certified. For all other operators and their immediate supervisors, 
the contractor must identify in the implementation documentation any 
additional positions that will be certified based on facility hazards and 
operational complexity. 
(2) The program leading to certification must be governed by written 
procedures that include requirements for qualifications through 
examinations and operational evaluations. 
(3) Certification must not be granted until all qualification requirements and 
other specified requirements (e.g., medical examination) have been 
satisfactorily completed and management has confirmed the candidate is 
capable of safely performing all functions of the position. 
(4) Satisfactory completion of qualifications for certification must be verified 
by a person other than the candidate’s immediate supervisor.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-11 
 
(5) Certification will be valid for a period not to exceed two years unless 
revoked for cause (e.g., medical disqualification). 
c. Certification is granted when: 
(1) All qualification requirements and other specified requirements (e.g., 
medical examination) have been satisfactorily completed, and  
(2) Management has confirmed the candidate is capable of safely performing 
all functions of the position.  
13. MEDICAL EXAMINATION. Upon acceptance of a conditional offer of employment, an 
initial medical examination must be given to certified operator candidates to verify health 
and physical fitness to safely perform their assigned tasks. A reexamination must be 
given to certified persons at least every two years unless more frequent monitoring is 
determined appropriate by the examining physician. Certified persons must also be 
cleared by medical examination prior to returning to full duty following any illness or 
injury which prevents the person from performing full duties for a period exceeding one 
month. Medical examinations for other operating contractor personnel must be job-
related and consistent with business necessity IAW 42 U.S.C. §12112(d). 
14. CONT INUING TRAINING. Continuing training must be provided to all operations 
positions (e.g., shift managers, operations supervisors, shift technical engineers, 
operators). Continuing training and qualification programs maintain and enhance the 
knowledge and skills of operating personnel. DOE-HDBK-1118-99, Best Practices for 
Continuing Training, may be consulted when developing such programs. 
a. Qualified and/or Certified Operators and Operations Supervisors. 
(1) Continuing training courses may be structured commensurate with specific 
position needs and may be taken throughout a two-year period.  
(2) Examinations may be used to ensure course material is understood and 
retained.  
(3) If the contractor chooses to give periodic requalification examinations in 
place of a comprehensive biennial requalification examination, the 
periodic requalification exams must include material from the continuing 
training courses. 
(4) Continuing training courses and exercises must cover:  
(a) Significant facility system and component changes  
(b) Procedure changes 
(c) Recent industry operating experience 
(d) Reinforcement of seldom-used knowledge and skills

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-12 1-29-2024 
 
(e) Changes in the safety basis documentation 
(f) Other training as needed to correct identified performance 
problems 
(g) Normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures 
(h) Use of facility systems to control or mitigate accidents 
(i) Topics identified in Section 7.a. 
(5) Operational Drills 
1 The continuing training program for qualified/certified 
operators and operations supervisors must include 
operational drills conducted in the facility or on a simulator 
to enable facility operating personnel and operating teams 
to maintain their ability to respond to abnormal or accident 
situations. Drills are intended for the entire operating crew 
but can be run on portions of the crew as applicable.  
2 O perational drills may be conducted in the facility or on a 
simulator. 
3 T he rigor and detail of a drill program will vary with 
facility complexity and hazard potential. 
4 O perational drills are NOT drills associated with 
"Operational Emergencies" as defined in DOE O 151.1D, 
Comprehensive Emergency Management System. 
5 T he operational drill program must be included in the 
Training Implementation Document. 
(6) Personnel responsible for developing and delivering training may be 
excused from continuing training on the subjects they teach. 
15. REQUALIFICATION/RECERTIFICATION. Completion of the continuing training and 
qualification program and requisite examinations is required for all operators and 
operations supervisors. Operators and supervisors cannot continue to function in 
qualified or certified positions if they have not completed all requalification or 
recertification program elements within the two-year continuing training cycle. The 
contractor must indicate that the person has successfully completed the requalification 
program and is requalified and/or recertified. 
a. Re qualification/Recertification Examinations . 
(1) Requalification/recertification includes requisite examinations 
(comprehensive examinations, operational evaluations, and oral 
examinations if required by the position). Acceptable alternative paths are:

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-13 
 
(i) a comprehensive biennial requalification examination, or (ii) periodic 
examinations (e.g., quarterly) during the continuing training cycle, 
provided the overall scope matches a biennial exam. 
(2) If personnel fail a requalification or recertification examination, show 
serious job performance deficiencies, or if any required training element 
lapses, the person must be removed from any activities or areas requiring 
the lapsed qualification or certification element. (See Section 15.c below 
on extensions for lapse of a required training element.)  
(3) Qualification or certification may be regained after completing remedial 
training designed to correct the deficiency and satisfactory completion of a 
reexamination, or completion of the needed training requirement. In 
addition, recertification must be based on: (i) review of an individual’s 
operating performance during the past certification period by line 
management, and (ii) a current medical examination. 
b. Absences. 
(1) When a qualified/certified individual (operator or operations supervisor) 
has been absent from duties (e.g., temporary reassignment, leave of 
absence, extended training, etc.) for more than three months, but less than 
12 months, the individual must confirm proficiency by complying with the 
requirements of Chapter II.3 or Chapter III.5, as applicable. The 
qualification or certification base date remains the same as it was before 
the absence. 
(2) When a qualified or certified individual has been absent for more than 12 
months, in addition to the above requirements, the individual is required to 
complete all the requisite examinations applicable to the position. Upon 
successful completion of the above requirements, a new qualification or 
certification date will be established. 
c. Extensions.  
(1) An extension of qualification or certification may be granted on a case-by-
case basis to support operational and mission commitments. An 
administrative procedure written by the contractor must be applied in these 
circumstances. 
(2) Documentation supporting the extension includes: 
(a) Approver of the extension 
(b) Length of the extension (not to exceed 12 months) 
(c) Explanation of the circumstances that prevented the person from 
completing the training requirements

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-I-14 1-29-2024 
 
(3) Extensions of certification for operators and operations supervisors can be 
approved only by the DOE Head of Field Organization or the NNSA Field 
Element Manager. Extensions of qualification for operators and operations 
supervisors may be approved by contractor facility management. 
16. MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISORY SKILLS TRAINING. 
a. Supervisory Skills Training. The supervisory skills training and qualification 
program must cover the following topics: 
(1) Leadership 
(2) Interpersonal communication 
(3) Roles, responsibilities, authority, and accountability 
(4) Motivation of personnel 
(5) Problem analysis and decision making 
(6) Fitness for duty procedures 
(7) Administrative policies and procedures 
(8) Conduct of Operations 
(9) Conduct of Maintenance as applicable, and the Work Control Process 
(10) Quality Assurance 
(11) Conduct of selection, training, qualification, and certification of personnel 
(12) Management of personnel performance issues 
(13) Nuclear Safety Culture 
b. Management Skills Training. The management training and qualification program 
must consider the supervisory skills listed above, plus:  
(1) Quality assurance and quality control 
(2) Facility security and emergency plans 
(3) Purchasing

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-I-15 (and Page 1-I-16) 
 
(4) Material storage 
(5) Facility modifications and configuration control 
(6) Nuclear, industrial, and radiation safety 
(7) Environmental compliance 
17. RECORDS.  
a. Administrative records procedures are needed to control and preserve training, 
qualification, and certification records in an easily auditable format. Guidance on 
constructing such procedures may be found in several documents published by the 
Nuclear Information and Records Management Association: TG-15, Management 
of Electronic Records; and TG-21, Required Records Protection, Disaster 
Recovery and Business Continuation.  
b. Training records are subject to a number of legal requirements, which can be found 
in: 10 CFR 835, subpart J; 10 CFR Section 851.25; 10 CFR Part 1008, Records 
Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act); and the current versions of DOE O 
206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program; DOE O 243.1; Records 
Management Program; DOE O 471.7, Controlled Unclassified Information. 
c. Some documents are sensitive due to their content (e.g., medical information) and 
must be protected. In such cases, the TID may identify the secured location and 
cybersecurity protections. Additionally, controlling access to physical and digital 
training records is needed to maintain examination security.  
d. Individual files include the following information: 
(1) Education, experience, employment history, and most recent health 
evaluation summary 
(2) Training and qualification programs completed and 
qualification/certification achieved; latest completed checklists, graded 
written examinations (with answers corrected as necessary or examination 
keys), simulator examinations, and operational evaluations used for 
qualification/certification 
(3) Lists of questions asked and the examiner’s overall evaluation of the 
responses on oral examinations 
(4) Correspondence relating to exceptions to training requirements and 
extensions of qualification/certification 
(5) Records of qualification for one-time-only special tests or operations 
(6) Attendance records for required training courses or sessions  
(7) Proficiency records if required by site procedures.

--- page 24 ---


--- page 25 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-II-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER II 
NONREACTOR NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE. The requirements in this CRD are intended to provide reasonable assurance 
that personnel who can impact the safety basis through their involvement in the operation, 
maintenance, and technical support at DOE Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nonreactor nuclear 
facilities possess qualifications to operate and maintain the facility safely and reliably under 
all conditions. This chapter contains specific training and qualification program 
requirements for nuclear facility operators, fissionable material handlers, and nuclear 
facility operations supervisors. The requirements of this chapter supplement those in 
Chapter I. 
Table 1 below summarizes the education and experience requirements for nonreactor 
nuclear facilities. Except for the training manager and instructional technologist, all 
college degrees must be in engineering or related scientific majors. 
Table 1: Hazard Category 2 and 3 Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities 
Personnel Education and Experience Requirements 
FUNCTIONAL LEVEL EDUCATION EXPERIENCE SPECIAL 
RQMTS 
Degree or Diploma Job Related Nuclear  
Managers Baccalaureate (1)  4 years (2) (6) 
Supervisors HS  3 years (3)  
Operators/Fissionable Material 
Handlers HS    
Technicians HS     
Maintenance Personnel HS     
Technical Support 
Personnel/Staff Baccalaureate 2 years 1 year  
Instructional Technologist Baccalaureate (4) 1 year  (4) 
Training Instructors HS  (5)   
Notes: 
(1) The training manager must have a baccalaureate degree (does not have to be in Engineering or related science). 
The training manager must have courses in education or training that focus on instructional analysis, design, 
development, delivery, and testing as well as evaluation of training and qualification programs if not included in 
the baccalaureate course material.   
(2) Job-related education or experience may be substituted on a case-by-case basis. The degree may be used to 
substitute up to 50 percent of the experience requirement per section I 4.e of this CRD. 
(3) Full-time related academic training (e.g., degree programs, trade schools, and vocational programs) may be 
substituted on a one-for-one basis for up to two years of nuclear experience. 
(4) Instructional technologists should have a degree in training/education. Training or education for instructional 
technologists must include courses on the SAT process including analysis, design, development, 
implementation, and evaluation. Additionally, instructional technologist training may include evaluation of 
training materials, instructor evaluation, and training and qualification program assessment. 
(5) Experience must be consistent with the material being presented. Instructors must have demonstrated knowledge of 
instructional techniques through training or experience and be qualified by the training manager (or equivalent) for 
the material being presented. Instructors responsible for instruction on subjects such as TSRs are required to 
complete training on facility operating characteristics and principles, and operating limits such as Safety

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-II-2 1-29-2024 
 
Limits, Limiting Control Settings, and Limiting Conditions for Operation. Significant involvement in the 
writing of TSRs is desirable but not required. 
(6) Managers must receive facility-specific training based upon a comparison of the individual’s background and 
abilities with the responsibilities and duties of the position. 
2. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFIED POSITIONS. 
a. Certified Operators and Fuel Handling Operators. Learning objectives developed 
from the Job/Task analysis must include information in the DSA, TSRs, system 
description manuals and operating procedures, lessons learned from Occurrence 
Reports, and other applicable sources. System process control operations may be 
included as appropriate for the facility. Certified supervisors need only supervise 
or direct the performance of system operations to satisfy this requirement. 
b. C ertified Supervisors  and Fuel Handling Supervisors. Job/Task analysis may 
generate learning objectives for certified supervisors similar to operators with 
increased emphasis on theory and basis for procedures. In addition, the following 
topics may be considered: 
(1) Procedures and limitations involved in initial equipment loading, 
alterations in fissionable material configuration, and determination of 
various internal and external effects on criticality safety 
(2) Procedures, equipment, and facilities available for handling and disposing 
of radioactive materials and effluent 
(3) Functions, assignments, and responsibilities of the maintenance and 
technical support organizations as related to nuclear facility safety 
(4) Applicable portions of the facility DSA and TSRs. 
c. Comprehensive written examinations must be used and must contain a 
representative selection of questions on the knowledge identified in the learning 
objectives.  
3. PROFICIENCY. 
a. The operating organization must establish procedures which define requirements 
and frequency (e.g., 8 hours per month, 10 hours per quarter, etc.) necessary to 
maintain proficiency. An individual normally maintains proficiency by having a 
position on a shift crew and being responsible for the day-to-day duties of that 
position. Personnel not assigned full-time to operating shifts may remain proficient 
by participating in a defined number of shift hours or operating activities. Both 
qualified and certified positions are required to maintain proficiency. 
b. If proficiency has not been maintained, qualification/certification must be 
suspended, and the person must not be assigned duties. Prior to reassigning an 
employee to duty following loss of active status, the contractor must evaluate and 
document the following factors:

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-II-3 (and Page 1-II-4) 
 
(1) Continuing training topics missed (if any) 
(2) Required reading applicable to the position 
(3) Changes in facility systems/processes 
(4) Performance of duties under the direct supervision of a person qualified in 
that position for a prescribed period 
(5) Written and oral examinations and performance evaluations if applicable  
c. If the facility or specific activities are not operated frequently enough to meet 
established requirements, qualification/certification must be reinstated prior to 
operation. One or more of the following qualification methods may be used: 
(1) Written and/or oral examination 
(2) Operational evaluation (including practical factors and performance 
demonstrations) 
(3) Facility or tabletop walkthrough 
(4) Simulated operations

--- page 28 ---


--- page 29 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-III-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER III 
REACTOR NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE. This chapter contains specific training requirements for positions unique to 
Hazard Category 1 and 2/Category A and B Reactor Nuclear Facilities, such as the 
specialized training and certification requirements for reactor operators. The requirements 
of this chapter supplement those in Chapter I. 
2. RE ACTOR TRAINING SUMMARY. Tables 2 and 3 below summarize the training 
requirements for two types of reactors. Except for the training manager, all college 
degrees must be in engineering or related scientific majors. 
Table 2: Hazard Category 1/Category A Reactor Facility 
Personnel Education and Experience Requirements 
FUNCTIONAL LEVEL 
EDUCATION EXPERIENCE SPECIAL RQMTS 
Degree/Diploma Other Job Related Nuclear  
Managers 
Plant/Facility Manager Baccalaureate  (1) 6 years (2)(3) (5) 
Operations Manager Baccalaureate  (15) 4 years (3)(6) (13) 
Maintenance Baccalaureate  (15) 4 years (3)(6) (8) 
Technical Manager Baccalaureate  (15) 4 years (3)(7)  
Supervisors 
Shift Supervisor HS   4 years (6) (19) 
Senior Reactor Operator HS  4 years 2 years (3) (10) 
Qualified Supervisor HS  4 years 1 year (4)  
Technical Support 
Technical Personnel Baccalaureate  2 years 1 year  
Shift Technical Advisor Baccalaureate   1 year (3) (18) 
Training Organization 
Training Manager Baccalaureate (17)  4 years (16) 2 years (9) 
Instructional Technologist Baccalaureate (14)  2 years (3)  
Training Instructor HS  2 years (11)  (12) 
Operators, Technicians, & Maintenance 
Auxiliary Operator HS   1 year (7)(3)  
Reactor Operator HS   3 years (3)(6)  
Technician HS  3 years   
Maintenance Personnel HS  1 year   
Notes: 
(1) Minimum of four years of supervisory or management experience.  
(2) Three years of nuclear experience may be power plant experience. 
(3) Minimum of six months onsite. 
(4) Minimum of three months onsite.

--- page 30 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-III-2 1-29-2024 
 
(5) Hold, or have held, a senior reactor operator (SRO) certification/NRC License for similar Hazard Category 1/ 
Category A reactor plant (or equivalent) or have been certified at an appropriate simulator. Plant managers who 
have an assistant holding an SRO certification need not meet this special standard.   
(6) Two years of nuclear experience may be nuclear/non-nuclear power plant experience. 
(7) One year of nuclear experience may be power plant experience. 
(8) Includes familiarity with nondestructive testing and understanding of electrical, pressure vessel, and piping 
codes and standards. 
(9) Training manager holds, or has held, an SRO certification/NRC License for similar Hazard Category 1/ 
Category A reactor plant (or equivalent) or have been certified at an appropriate simulator. If the training 
manager does not hold, or has not held, an SRO certification, someone who holds or has held an SRO 
certification must be responsible for the content and conduct of training for certified operators.  
(10) Special requirements for the SRO: 
(a) One year of nuclear power plant experience as an active reactor operator of the same vendor and vintage; or 
(b) One and a half years as an active reactor operator at a comparable [boiling water reactor (BWR)/pressurized 
water reactor (PWR)] facility or a noncomparable commercial power reactor facility; or 
(c) Four years as a senior operator level certified instructor at the current or a commercial power reactor facility. 
(11) Experience must be consistent with the material being presented. Instructors must have demonstrated knowledge of 
instructional techniques through training or experience and be qualified by the training manager (or equivalent) for 
the material being presented. 
(12) Instructors providing instruction on the reactor plant simulator to certified personnel are required to hold, or have 
held, an SRO certification for a similar Hazard Category 1/Category A reactor plant (or equivalent), or have been 
certified on the reactor plant simulator. Persons responsible for instruction of subjects such as TSRs, reactor 
operating principles and characteristics, and control manipulations are required to have received SRO (or 
equivalent) training.  
(13) The operations manager must hold an SRO certification at the time of appointment to the position.  
(14) Instructional technologists should have a degree in training/education.  Training or education for instructional 
technologists must include courses on the SAT process including analysis, design, development, implementation, 
and evaluation. Additionally, instructional technologist training may include evaluation of training materials, 
instructor evaluation, and training and qualification program assessment. 
(15) Minimum of three years of supervisory or management experience. 
(16) Minimum of one year of supervisory or management experience. 
(17) The training manager must have a baccalaureate degree (does not have to be in Engineering or related science). 
The training manager must have courses in education or training that focus on instructional analysis, design, 
development, delivery and testing as well as evaluation of training and qualification programs if not included in the 
baccalaureate course material.   
(18) The shift technical advisor (STA) must have a thorough understanding of facility instrumentation and control. 
(19) The shift supervisor must be certified SRO.

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-III-3 
 
Table 3: Hazard Category 2/Category B Reactor Facility 
Personnel Education and Experience Requirements 
FUNCTIONAL LEVEL 
EDUCATION EXPERIENCE 
SPECIAL RQMTS 
Degree or Diploma Job Related Nuclear 
Managers 
Plant/Facility Manager Baccalaureate  6 years (1)(2)  
Operations Manager Baccalaureate  4 years (2) (5)  
Maintenance Baccalaureate  4 years (2)   
Technical Manager Baccalaureate  4 years (2)   
Supervisors 
Shift Supervisor HS  3 years (2) (8) 
Senior Reactor Operator HS  3 years (2)  
Training Organization 
Training Manager Baccalaureate (6) 4 years 2 years  
Instructional Technologist Baccalaureate (7) 2 years   
Training Instructor HS (3)  (4) 
Technical Support 
Technical Personnel Baccalaureate 2 years 1 year  
Reactor Operator HS    
Technician HS 1 year   
Maintenance Personnel HS 1 year   
Notes: 
(1) Job-related education or experience may be substituted on a case-by-case basis. The degree may fulfill four of 
the six years of nuclear experience.  
(2) Experience acquired at nuclear power, test, research, or production reactors or at a critical facility counts 
towards nuclear experience for purposes of this Order. 
(3) Experience must be consistent with the material being presented. Instructors must have demonstrated knowledge of 
instructional techniques through training or experience and be qualified by the training manager (or equivalent) for 
the material being presented. 
(4) Persons responsible for instruction of subjects such as TSRs, reactor operating principles and characteristics, 
and control manipulations are required to have received SRO (or equivalent) training. 
(5) The operations manager must hold an SRO certification at the time of appointment to the position.  
(6) The training manager must have a baccalaureate degree (does not have to be in Engineering or related science). 
The training manager must have courses in education or training that focus on instructional analysis, design, 
development, delivery and testing as well as evaluation of training and qualification programs if not included in the 
baccalaureate course material.   
(7) Instructional technologists should have a degree in training/education.  Training or education for instructional 
technologists must include courses on the SAT process including analysis, design, development, 
implementation, and evaluation. Additionally, instructional technologist training may include evaluation of 
training materials, instructor evaluation, and training and qualification program assessment. 
(8) The shift supervisor must be certified SRO.

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-III-4 1-29-2024 
 
3. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS: HAZARD CATEGORY 1/CATEGORY A REACTOR. 
This section provides additional position-specific training requirements for Hazard 
Category 1/Category A reactor personnel.  
a. E ngineering Expertise On -Shift Requirements. Safe operation demands the 
operating shift possess adequate operational and accident management expertise. 
This demand may be satisfied by designating a Shift Technical Advisor (STA) for 
each shift, or by combining the STA position with the shift supervisor or an on-
shift SRO. If the combined approach is utilized, the designated STA must have the 
following qualifications:  
(1) Currently certified as an SRO 
(2) Successful completion of STA training requirements in paragraph 3.c. 
(3) One of the following educational requirements: 
(a) Baccalaureate in Engineering 
(b) Professional Engineer’s license 
(c) Baccalaureate in Engineering Technology, with course work in the 
physical, mathematical, or engineering sciences 
(d) Baccalaureate in a physical, mathematical, or engineering science, 
with course work in engineering technology 
b. Simulator Requirements. The need for a full-scope or part-task simulator for DOE 
test and research reactors may be based on an evaluation conducted by the 
operating organization. The evaluation may consider whether adequate training 
may be achieved by actual facility maneuvers, drills, part-task simulators, or a 
combination of these. The evaluation may also consider the ability to adequately 
provide in-facility training covering all operator actions needed to achieve and 
maintain safe shutdown. The operating contractor may evaluate the ability to 
provide adequate training in normal operations, anticipated transients, and 
accident conditions. The assessment of the need for a simulator must be reviewed 
by the DOE Head of Field Organization or the NNSA Field Element Manager and 
the Program Secretarial Officer or the NNSA Deputy Administrator. 
c. S hift Technical Advisor . STA training must include:  
(1) The duties, responsibilities, and authorities of the STA 
(2) Postulated accidents analyzed in the facility DSA and the potential 
consequences of these accidents 
(3) Thermodynamics/fluid flow, reactor physics, system engineering, nuclear 
instrumentation, use of a process computer, and facility response to 
normal and abnormal conditions

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-III-5 
 
(4) Performance of control manipulations, either on a simulator, in the facility 
during maneuvers and drills, or a combination of these  
(5) Response to and analysis of facility transients and accidents  
(6) The relationship of accident conditions to offsite consequences and 
protective action strategies 
d. Fuel Handling Operations [to include Special Nuclear Material (SNM) Handling 
and Fissionable Material Handling]. 
(1) Fuel handling operations must always be performed by or under the direct 
supervision of a person certified to perform the required functions.  
(2) A specific training and qualification program that comprises initial and 
continuing training may be established to certify fuel handling operators 
and supervisors.  
(3) Training and examination may be limited to fuel handling safety and 
actions to be taken during abnormal and emergency conditions. 
(4) Written examinations must be given to gauge the qualification of fuel 
handling operators. 
NOTE: The training requirements listed above are not necessary if fuel handling 
is performed by persons trained for such as part of reactor operator and SRO 
certification programs. 
e. Reactor Operators. Training must include information from the following as 
applicable:  
(1) Fundamentals of reactor theory, heat transfer, thermodynamics, and fluid 
mechanics 
(2) General design features of the core  
(3) Components and design features of major systems  
(4) Facility operating characteristics during steady state and transient conditions 
(5) Procedures and TSRs including normal, abnormal, emergency, and 
administrative procedures; and operational limitations 
(6) An understanding of the DSA, TSRs, system description manuals and 
operating procedures 
(7) Radiological safety principles and procedures 
(8) Use of installed facility systems for the control and mitigation of an 
accident in which the core may be severely damaged.

--- page 34 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-III-6 1-29-2024 
 
(9) Written examinations containing a selection of questions from the learning 
objectives developed from the analysis of the job must be administered to 
reactor operator candidates.  
f. Senior Reactor Operators. Training must include information from the following 
as applicable:  
(1) Conditions and limitations for facility operations  
(2) Operating limitations in the TSRs and their bases 
(3) Procedures required to obtain authority for design and operating changes 
in the facility  
(4) Radiation hazards that may arise during normal and abnormal situations, 
including maintenance activities and various contamination conditions 
(5) Assessment of facility conditions and selection of appropriate procedures 
during normal, abnormal, and emergency situations  
(6) Procedures and limitations for initial core loading, alterations in core 
configuration, control rod programming, and determination of various 
internal and external effects on core reactivity 
(7) Fuel handling facilities and procedures 
(8) Written examinations containing questions on the learning objectives 
listed above must be administered to SRO candidates.  
g. Operating Crew/Shift Training. 
(1) Reactor operator candidates must: (i) be assigned to an operating crew 
full-time for a minimum of three months’ shift training, with no 
concurrent duties unrelated to facility operations, and (ii) during this 
period, under the observation and control of a certified reactor operator, 
manipulate the facility controls and perform the same duties as a certified 
reactor operator.  
(2) SRO candidates must: (i) be assigned to an operating crew full-time for a 
minimum of three months’ shift training with no concurrent duties 
unrelated to facility operations, and (ii) during this period, under the 
observation and control of a certified SRO, supervise the manipulation of 
the facility controls and perform the same duties as a certified SRO. 
h. Control Manipulation Requirements for Certified Positions. 
(1) The list of control manipulations for certified positions is based on the SAT 
analysis for these positions. This list (i) specifies which manipulations are to 
be performed annually and which are to be performed biennially, and (ii) 
identifies any control manipulations that may affect reactivity.

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-III-7 
 
(2) A minimum of five reactivity manipulations must be performed by reactor 
operator and SRO candidates prior to initial certification. Additional 
control manipulations may be based on the job analysis. 
(3) Control manipulations are performed by candidates for certification prior 
to initial certification and thereafter on a biennial basis for reactor 
operators and SROs as part of the continuing training and qualification 
program. 
(4) Certified supervisors need only supervise or direct the performance of 
control manipulations to satisfy these criteria. 
i. Medical Examination Requirements. For Hazard Category 1/Category A reactors, 
the contractor must comply with 10 CFR 851, Appendix A, Section 8, 
Occupational Medicine. Medical personnel are encouraged to use medical 
examination criteria and procedures in ANSI/ANS 3.4-2013, Medical Certification 
and Monitoring of Licensed Personnel at Nuclear Power Plants, and NRC 
Regulatory Guide 1.134, Medical Assessment of Licensed Personnel at Nuclear 
Power Plants, Rev. 4, September 2014. 
4. S PECIFIC REQUIREMENTS: HAZARD CATEGORY 2/CATEGORY B REACTOR.  
a. Fuel Handling Operations. All fuel handling operations must be performed by or 
under the direct supervision of a person certified to perform such operations. 
Supporting requirements: (1) establish a specific training and qualification 
program (initial and continued) to certify fuel handling operators and supervisors 
for their assigned tasks,  and (2) administer written examinations. Training and 
examination may be limited to that needed for fuel handling safety, the impact of 
fuel handling on safety, and actions to be taken during abnormal and emergency 
conditions. 
The requirements above do not apply if fuel handling is performed by reactor 
operators and SROs trained for fuel handling. 
b. Reactor Operators. Training for reactor operators may consider the previous 
experience, training, and level of responsibility of the candidate. The qualification 
program may include both classroom-type and on-the-job training to assure 
familiarity with all required aspects of reactor operation, including anticipated 
transients and accident conditions. Where construction precludes on-the-job 
training, practical experience at similar reactors, training on simulators, and other 
appropriate training may be accepted. Training must include information from the 
following as applicable: 
(1) Facility design and operating characteristics, including facility design 
features, design and operating characteristics and limitations, safety and 
emergency systems, experiment and test facilities, engineered safety 
features, and shielding

--- page 36 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2A 
Page 1-III-8 1-29-2024 
 
(2) An understanding of the DSA, TSRs, system description manuals and 
operating procedures 
(3) Principles of facility operation, including principles of reactor operation, 
radiological protection, effects of experiments, basic reactor theory, heat 
transfer, fluid flow, and thermodynamics, as necessary, for the specific 
design of the reactor 
(4) Instrumentation and control, including nuclear instruments, process 
instruments, control systems, radiation monitoring systems and survey 
equipment, experiment and test facility instrumentation, and manipulation 
of reactivity controls 
(5) Procedures and TSRs, including normal, abnormal, emergency, 
radiological and hazardous materials control and administrative 
procedures, and operational limitations 
(6) Written examinations based on the above learning objectives and 
developed from an analysis of the job must be administered to reactor 
operator candidates  
c. Senior Reactor Operators. Training for SROs may consider the previous 
experience, training, and level of responsibility of the candidate. Training must 
include information from the following as applicable: Radioactive materials 
handling, including SNM and radioactive materials hazards, handling, disposal, 
and safe practices  
(1) Information in the DSA, TSRs, system description manuals and operating 
procedures, and lessons learned from Occurrence Reports 
(2) Advanced theory and operation, including reactivity effects during 
experimental and maintenance activities, fuel handling, fuel burnup and 
reactivity worth; alterations in core configuration; TSRs and their 
technical bases; and administrative responsibilities for an SRO’s level of 
responsibility 
(3) Written examinations based on the above learning objectives developed 
from an analysis of the job must be administered to SRO candidates.  
d. Control Manipulation Requirements for Certified Positions. (See Chapter III, 
Section 3.) 
e. Medical Examination Requirements. For Hazard Category 2/Category B reactors, 
the contractor must comply with 10 CFR 851, Appendix A, Section 8, 
Occupational Medicine. Medical personnel are encouraged to use the medical 
examination criteria and procedures in ANSI/ANS 15.4-2016, Selection and 
Training of Personnel for Research Reactors.

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 1, Chapter III – CRD, Contractors Only 
1-29-2024 Page 1-III-9 (and Page 1-III-10) 
 
5. PROFICIENCY. General proficiency requirements are provided in Chapter II, Section 4. 
The following are the minimum duty times to maintain proficiency for reactor operators 
and SROs: 
a. Hazard Category 1/Category A Reactors: 36 hours per quarter, in blocks of time no 
less than four hours.  
b. Hazard Category 2/Category B Reactors: To maintain active status, perform 
certification duties for at least four hours per quarter. 
c. For other operators, operations supervisors, and on-shift technical personnel, 
specific activities or duty hours per quarter required to maintain active status are 
defined by the operating contractor. 
d. If proficiency is not maintained, the person may not be assigned duties. Prior to 
restoring an employee to duty following loss of active status, the contractor may 
evaluate and document the following factors:  
(1) Continuing training topics missed (if any) 
(2) Required reading applicable to the position 
(3) Changes in facility systems/processes 
(4) Performance of duties under the direct supervision of a person qualified in 
that position for a prescribed period IAW Section e below 
(5) Written and oral examinations and performance evaluations as deemed 
necessary 
e. If proficiency is not maintained, Certified Reactor Operators and SROs must: 
(1) perform certification duties under the direct supervision of a person certified in 
that position for a minimum period of time, as stated below; (2) tour the facility; 
and (3) review shift turnover procedures. The minimum required performance 
times for certified duties are: 
(1) Hazard Category 1/Category A reactor certified reactor operators and 
SROs: 24 hours (in blocks of no less than four hours).  
(2) Hazard Category 2/Category B reactor certified reactor operators and 
SROs: six hours.

--- page 38 ---


--- page 39 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 2-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2. REFERENCES 
This Attachment provides information associated with DOE O 426.2A as well as information 
applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD (Attachment 1 to DOE O 426.2A) is 
inserted. 
1. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  
a. 10 CFR Part 55, Operators’ Licenses  
b. 10 CFR Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management 
c. 10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection 
d. 10 CFR Part 850, Chronic Beryllium Disease Prevention Program 
e. 10 CFR Part 851, DOE Worker Safety and Health Program 
f. 10 CFR 1008, Records Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act) 
2. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association.  
a. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association, Management of 
Electronic Records, TG-15-1998 
b. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association, Electronic Records 
Protection and Restoration, TG-21-2011 
3. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.  
a. Regulatory Guide 1.134, Medical Assessment of Licensed Operators or 
Applicants for Operator Licenses at Nuclear Power Plants 
b. Regulatory Guide 1.149, Nuclear Power Plant Simulation Facilities for Use in 
Operator Training, License Examinations, and Applicant Experience 
Requirements, Rev. 4 (2011) 
c. Regulatory Guide 1.8, Qualification and Training of Personnel for Nuclear 
Power Plants, Rev. 3 (2000) 
4. American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear Society (ANS) STD. 
a. ANSI/ANS 3.1-2014, Selection, Qualification, and Training of Personnel for 
Nuclear Power Plants 
b. ANSI/ANS 3.4-2013, Medical Certification and Monitoring of Personnel 
Requiring Operator Licenses for Nuclear Power Plants 
c. ANSI/ANS 3.5-2009, Nuclear Power Plant Simulators for Use in Operator 
Training and Examination

--- page 40 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2A 
Page 2-2 1-29-2024 
 
 
d. ANSI/ANS 8.1-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable 
Materials Outside Reactors 
e. ANSI/ANS 8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality Control of Special Actinide Nuclides 
f. ANSI/ANS 8.20-1991, Nuclear Criticality Safety Training (Reaffirmed 2015) 
g. ANSI/ANS 15.4-2016, Selection and Training of Personnel for Research Reactors 
5. DOE Orders (O) and Manuals (M). 
a. DOE O 151.1, Comprehensive Emergency Management System, current version 
b. DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version 
c. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current 
version 
d. DOE O 227.1, Independent Oversight Program, current version 
e. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version 
f. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version 
g. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version 
h. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version 
i. DOE O 425.1, Verification of Readiness to Startup or Restart Nuclear Facilities, 
current version 
j. DOE O 440.1, Worker Protection Program for DOE (including the National 
Nuclear Security Administration) Federal Employees, current version 
k. DOE O 460.1, Hazardous Material Packaging and Transportation Safety, current 
version 
l. DOE O 471.7, Controlled Unclassified Information, current version 
6. DOE Handbooks (HDBK) and Technical Standards (STD). 
a. DOE-STD-1070-94, Criteria for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training 
Programs (R: 2014) 
b. DOE-HDBK-1078-94, Training Program Handbook: A Systematic Approach to 
Training (R: 2014) 
c. DOE-HDBK-1211-2014, Activity-Level Work Planning and Control 
Implementation

--- page 41 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 2-3 (and Page 2-4) 
 
 
d. DOE-STD-1098-2017, Radiological Control 
7. Other.  
a. Department of Energy Implementation Plan for Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety 
Board Recommendation 2011-1, December 27, 2011 
b. Other training resources are available at the National Training Center Training 
Library (https://sites.ntc.doe.gov/partners/tr/SitePages/Home.aspx) and in DOE’s 
Technical Standards archives. Examples of archived documents: 
(1) DOE-HDBK-1204-97, Guide to Good Practices for the Development of 
Test Items 
(2) DOE-HDBK-1205-97, Guide to Good Practices for the Design, 
Development, and Implementation of Examinations 
(3) DOE-HDBK-1206-98, Guide to Good Practices for On-The-Job Training 
(4) DOE-HDBK-1078-94, Training Program Handbook: A Systematic 
Approach to Training 
(5) DOE-HDBK-1118-99, Guide to Good Practices for Continuing Training

--- page 42 ---


--- page 43 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 3-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3. DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information associated with DOE O 426.2A as well as information 
applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD (Attachment 1 to DOE O 426.2A) is 
inserted. 
1. Auxiliary Operator is an operator whose duties and responsibilities involve balance of 
plant operations typically outside the control area. 
2. C ategory A Reactor Facilities means those production, test, and research reactors 
designated by DOE based on power level, potential fission product inventory, and 
experimental capability. Category A reactors are Hazard Category 1 nuclear facilities. 
3. C ategory B Reactor Facilities means those test and research reactors designated by DOE 
based on power level, potential fission product inventory, and experimental capability. 
Category B reactors are Hazard Category 2 nuclear facilities. 
4. C ertification  is the process by which contractor management endorses and documents, in 
writing, the satisfactory achievement of qualification by a person for a position 
designated for certification. Certification follows the completion of the qualification 
program for those positions identified as requiring certification. The notable differences 
between initial certification and qualification are: (a) requirements for an oral 
examination or board, and (b) certification requires official contractor management 
endorsement, outside of the individual’s direct supervisor, of their qualification to ensure 
senior management involvement in the qualification of designated operations positions 
(i.e., operators and supervisors).  
5. C ertified Person  is a person who has current certification in accordance with this Order. 
6. Controls means when used with respect to nuclear reactors, apparatus, and mechanisms 
that, when manipulated, directly affect the reactivity or power level of a reactor or the 
status of an engineered safety feature.  
7. C ritical Assembly  means special nuclear devices designed and used to sustain nuclear 
reactions, which may be subject to frequent core and lattice configuration changes and 
may frequently be used as mockups of reactor configurations (10 CFR Part 830). For 
purposes of this Order, critical assemblies are considered Hazard Category 2 nuclear 
facilities or Category B reactors. 
8. D irect Supervision  occurs when the qualified watchstander's sole responsibility is the 
supervision of the trainee and the watchstander is continuously capable of physically 
preventing any adverse actions of the trainee by direct intervention of the trainee’s 
actions. 
9. D ocumented Safety Analysis (DSA)  means a documented analysis of the extent to which 
a nuclear facility can be operated safely with respect to workers, the public, and the 
environment, including a description of the conditions, safe boundaries, and hazard 
controls that provide the basis for ensuring safety. (10 CFR Part 830)

--- page 44 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2A 
Page 3-2 1-29-2024 
 
 
10. Education is the successful completion of the requirements established by an accredited 
educational institution. 
11. E ngineered Safety Features mean structures, systems, or components that prevent and/or 
mitigate the consequences of potential accidents described in the Documented Safety 
Analysis (DSA). 
12. E xception as used in this Order, refers to a release of an individual from portions of a 
training and qualification program through prior education, experience, testing, 
evaluation of work products, and training determined by using a DOE approved 
procedure. 
13. E xemption is a formal and final release from a provision in a DOE Order, Notice, or 
Manual included in the contract; or from one or more requirements in a Regulation. (See 
DOE O 410.1, Central Technical Authority Responsibilities Regarding Nuclear Safety 
Requirements, current version.) 
14. F issionable Materials mean a nuclide capable of sustaining a neutron -induced fission 
chain reaction. These nuclides are uranium-233, uranium-235, plutonium-238, 
plutonium-239, plutonium-241, neptunium-237, americium-241, and curium-244. 
15. F issionable Materials Handler is a person certified by contractor facility management to 
manipulate or handle significant quantities of fissionable materials; or manipulate the 
controls of equipment used to produce, process, transfer, store, or package significant 
quantities of such materials. 
16. Fu ll -Scope Simulator is a simulator incorporating detailed modeling of systems of the 
reference facility with which the operator interfaces in the control room environment. 
The control area operating consoles are included. Such a simulator demonstrates expected 
facility response to normal and abnormal conditions. 
17. F unctional Level  refers to level in an organization such as manager, supervisor, or the 
various degrees of operator and personnel. 
18. G eneral Employee Training (GET) for the purpose of this Order, is the training required 
to allow persons to have unescorted access to Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 nuclear 
facilities. 
19. G raded Approach means the process of ensuring the level of analysis, documentation, 
and actions used to comply with a requirement are commensurate with: (a) the relative 
importance to safety, safeguards, and security; (b) the magnitude of any hazard involved; 
(c) the life-cycle stage of a facility; (d) the programmatic mission of the facility; (e) the 
particular characteristics of a facility; (f) the relative importance of radiological and 
nonradiological hazards; and (g) any other relevant factors (10 CFR Part 830). Proper use 
of the systematic approach to training (SAT) ensures the application of the graded 
approach.

--- page 45 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 3-3 
 
 
20. Hazard Categories are the calculated consequences of postulated unmitigated releases of 
radioactive and/or hazardous material evaluated as required by 10 CFR Part 830 and 
classified by the following hazard categories: 
a. Category 1. The hazard analysis shows the potential for significant offsite 
consequences. 
b. Category 2. The hazard analysis shows the potential for significant onsite 
consequences. 
c. Category 3. The hazard analysis shows the potential for only significant localized 
consequences. 
21. Implementation Documentation (see Training Implementation Document)  
22. Instructional Technologist is the individual primarily involved in the analysis, design, 
development, and implementation of training for job positions/activities in nuclear 
facilities. This individual works under the direction of the training manager and in 
coordination with the training instructors to: (a) conduct needs and job analysis to 
identify training requirements (valid task list, training requirements matrix); (b) design 
training, including determination of training setting and development of learning 
objectives, evaluation standards, and examination test items; (c) develop training 
materials, including lesson plans and trainee support materials; (d) conduct classroom, 
on-the-job, simulator, distance, or laboratory training; and (e) assist line management in 
the evaluation of training and qualification program. 
23. J ob Analysis is a systematic method used in obtaining a detailed listing of the tasks of a 
specific job. 
24. Mai ntenance Personnel  are persons responsible for performing maintenance on 
engineered safety features and support systems as identified in the Documented Safety 
Analysis (DSA) (this would include personnel responsible for planning and preparing the 
work packages associated with maintenance). 
25. Man ager  refers to a person whose assigned responsibilities include one or more of the 
following: nuclear safety, operational efficiency and reliability, control of onsite 
emergencies, and any other activities necessary to safeguard the health and safety of the 
workforce, the general public, and the environment. Operational responsibilities include 
prioritizing and assessing facility activities including modifications and overseeing the 
operating organization. This functional level typically includes the plant/facility manager 
or Director, the operations manager, the maintenance manager, the training manager, and 
the technical/engineering manager. 
26. M edical Examination  means an examination performed by a licensed physician, or an 
examination performed by physician’s assistant that is subsequently reviewed and 
approved by a licensed physician, to determine the physical condition and general health 
of a person for duty.

--- page 46 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2A 
Page 3-4 1-29-2024 
 
 
27. Must and May: (a) Must is used to denote a requirement; (b) May is used to denote 
permission or recommendation. 
28. N onreactor Nuclear Facility  means those facilities, activities, or operations that involve, 
or will involve, radioactive and/or fissionable materials in such form and quantity that a 
nuclear or a nuclear explosive hazard potentially exists to workers, the public, or the 
environment, but does not include accelerators and their operations and does not include 
activities involving only incidental use and generation of radioactive materials or 
radiation, such as check and calibration sources; use of radioactive sources in research, 
experimental, and analytical laboratory activities; electron microscopes; and X-ray 
machines. (10 CFR Part 830) 
29. N uclear Experience when used in reference to Hazard Category 1/Category A and Hazard 
Category 2/Category B Reactors, is experience acquired at commercial, production, 
training, test, military, or research reactors and includes experience acquired in reactor 
facility startup activities or operation. Experience in design, construction, maintenance, or 
related technical services that are job-related may also be considered. Appropriate 
research, teaching, or both may be counted as nuclear experience. When used in reference 
to nonreactor nuclear facilities, also includes experience acquired at any facility in which 
radioactive materials are routinely handled, stored, processed, or utilized. 
30. N uclear Facility  means a reactor or a nonreactor nuclear facility where an activity is 
conducted for or on behalf of DOE and includes any related area, structure, facility, or 
activity to the extent necessary to ensure proper implementation of the requirements 
established in 10 CFR Part 830. 
31. N uclear Safety Culture  is defined as the core values and behaviors resulting from a 
collective commitment by leaders and individuals to emphasize safety over competing 
goals to ensure protection of people and the environment. 
32. O perators are persons responsible for performing operations associated with engineered 
safety features as identified in the Documented Safety Analysis (DSA), operating support 
systems which could affect engineered safety features, or conducting activities with 
special nuclear materials (SNMs) and/or radioactive materials. Duties may include 
manipulating facility controls, monitoring parameters, and operating facility equipment. 
Operators include reactor operators, fissionable material handlers, tritium facility 
operators, chemical process operators, waste tank operators, and enrichment facility 
operators. 
33. O perating Organization  is the contractor organization responsible for facility operation, 
maintenance, and technical support services related to DOE nuclear facility operations. 
34. O perational Drill is a drill conducted in the facility that exercises process/facility 
equipment, procedures, and level of knowledge for qualified/certified positions. These 
activities are also intended to demonstrate knowledge of operational procedures during 
abnormal conditions. 
35. O perational Evaluation  is a documented evaluation of an individual’s knowledge and 
skills for a position requiring qualification/certification. The operational evaluation is a

--- page 47 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 3-5 
 
 
facility walkthrough evaluation conducted for qualification/certification that may include 
system and/or component operation or simulation of operations, during which the 
candidate is observed and questioned regarding procedures, safety implications, system 
knowledge, and operational safety requirements, as applicable.  
36. Operations Manager is the individual responsible for maintaining the safety envelope of 
the facility/operation; managing operators and their supervisors; and achieving 
operational goals within budget and schedule. 
37. P articipation  is taking an active role in the duties and responsibilities relative to the 
function for which the candidate/trainee is being considered. Simple observation is not 
considered participation. 
38. P erformance Demonstration  is a documented evaluation of an individual's knowledge and 
skills for a position requiring only qualification. The intent of the process is similar to 
that of an Operational Evaluation but tailored to more limited job requirements. (See 
Operational Evaluation definition.) 
39. P erformance Evaluation is a  generic term used to describe when one’s performance is 
being evaluated to determine if they possess the knowledge and skills required to perform 
identified jobs, tasks, or processes.  
40. P ower Plant Experience  is experience acquired in the testing, operation, or maintenance 
of nuclear or other power generating facilities. Experience in design and construction 
may be considered applicable power plant experience and may be evaluated on a case-by-
case basis. 
41. P ractical Factors (Prac-Facs) are discrete tasks identified in the design phase and are 
performed using approved procedures/administrative guides/common practices while 
under the instruction (U/I) of a qualified operator/supervisor/manager. May also be 
accomplished performing the duties of the qualified position. 
42. Proficiency means actively participating in job functions associated with the 
position/watchstation (whether qualified and/or certified) for a specified amount of hours 
per month/quarter as specified in facility procedures.  
43. Q ualification  is the process for attaining, demonstrating, and documenting the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities identified for a position by the systematic approach to 
training (SAT) process. It includes education, experience, classroom and on-the-job 
training, examination, and any special requirements necessary to perform assigned 
responsibilities for a given position. 
44. Reactor is a device used to initiate and control a sustained nuclear chain reaction. 
45. Reactor Operator means a person certified by contractor nuclear facility line or program 
management to operate (manipulate the controls of) a DOE-owned reactor. 
46. S afety Analysis means a documented process: (a ) to provide systematic identification of 
hazards within a given DOE operation; (b) to describe and analyze the adequacy of

--- page 48 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2A 
Page 3-6 1-29-2024 
 
 
measures taken to eliminate, control, or mitigate identified hazards; and (c) to analyze 
and evaluate potential accidents and their associated risks. 
47. Safety Basis means the documented safety analysis (DSA) and hazard controls that 
provide reasonable assurance the DOE nuclear facility can be operated safely in a manner 
that adequately protects workers, the public, and the environment. (10 CFR Part 830) 
48. S enior Reactor Operator  (SRO) means a person certified by contractor nuclear facility 
line or program management to operate and direct the operation of a DOE-owned reactor. 
49. S hift Supervisor is a qualified or certified person in the operating organization designated 
by contractor facility management to directly supervise operations, operational activities, 
and operations-related activities of personnel at DOE-owned Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities. Substitute titles may be used for positions of equivalent functions. 
50. S hift Technical Advisor (STA) is a person who has been assigned to provide on-shift 
advice and counsel to shift operating personnel during shift activities and to help 
determine cause and mitigation of facility accidents. 
51. S ignificant Quantity of Fissionable Materials  is the minimum quantity of fissionable 
material in designated form for which control is required to maintain subcriticality under 
all normal and credible abnormal conditions. The single parameter limits for fissionable 
materials are listed in ANSI/ANS-8.1-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with 
Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors, and ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality 
Control of Special Actinide Elements. These standards require that limits be adjusted 
where process conditions could credibly involve moderators or reflectors that are more 
effective than light water. 
52. S upervisors are individuals who are responsible for the quantity and quality of work 
performed and who direct the actions of operators, fissionable material handlers, 
technicians, or maintenance personnel. Supervisory positions typically include shift 
operations manager (or shift manager), reactor supervisors, fissionable material handler 
supervisors, tritium operator supervisors, chemical process operator supervisors, waste 
tank operator supervisors, maintenance supervisors, technician supervisors, and technical 
support supervisors. Their duties include ensuring work is performed in compliance with 
procedures, policies, and industrial safety practices. 
53. S ystematic Approach to Training (SAT) is a logical process for identifying and acquiring 
the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to safely perform the duties of a specific 
position. It includes the following elements:  
a. An analysis of the jobs to be performed 
b. Design of learning objectives derived from the analysis of the job that describe 
desired performance after training 
c. Development of lesson plans and other training materials 
d. Implementation of the developed training

--- page 49 ---
DOE O 426.2A Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
1-29-2024 Page 3-7 
 
 
e. Evaluation of trainee mastery of the objectives during training 
f. Evaluation and revision of the training based on the performance of trained 
personnel in the job setting 
54. Task is a well-defined unit of work having an identifiable beginning and end, which is a 
measurable component of the duties and responsibilities of a specific job. 
55. T echnical Personnel  are persons responsible for supervision, design, evaluation, 
modification, testing, and performance of technical support functions for the operating 
organization. Technical personnel typically have expertise in mechanical, electrical, 
instrumentation and control, chemistry, radiation protection, safety, quality 
assurance/independent assessment, software quality assurance, facility engineering, 
system/process engineering, safety basis engineering, criticality safety, or nuclear safety. 
(Examples of technical personnel responsibilities include: surveillance and testing related 
to normal facility operation and operation of safety-related systems; analyzing routine 
operational/facility data; planning modifications to facility safety systems; providing 
technical assistance during normal, abnormal, and emergency facility conditions to offer 
technical problem resolution to operations in their area of expertise; providing 
engineering/technical assistance in support functions to the facility such as radiological, 
quality assurance, and for initial design or modifications that impact nuclear safety.) 
56. T echnical Safety Requirements (TSRs)  mean the limits, controls, and related actions that 
establish the specific parameters and requisite actions for the safe operation of a nuclear 
facility and include, as appropriate for the work and hazards identified in the documented 
safety analysis (DSA) for the facility: safety limits, operating limits, surveillance 
requirements, administrative and management controls, use and application provisions, 
and design features, as well as a bases appendix. (10 CFR Part 830) 
57. T echnicians are principally involved in calibration, inspection, troubleshooting, testing, 
maintenance, and radiation protection activities. Examples are laboratory technicians, 
instrument technicians, industrial hygiene, environmental, quality control, 
decontamination and decommissioning technicians, and radiological control technicians. 
58. T raining  is instruction designed for acquisition of knowledge, skills, and abilities to 
develop or improve job performance. 
59. T raining Implementation Document  (TID) (also referred to Implementation Document in 
this Order) is a document (e.g., Training Implementation Matrix (TIM), Training 
Program Plan (TPP), or Training Program Description (TPD), etc.), prepared by the 
contractor, to identify those sections of this CRD that are applicable to a particular 
facility.  The document defines and describes the application of personnel selection, 
qualification, certification, and training requirements identified in this CRD.  It must 
clearly define the organization, planning, and administration of the program and set forth 
the responsibility, authority, and methods for conducting training.  Suitable justification 
must be included in the document for CRD provisions that are not implemented.  At sites 
with several facilities, a combined training document may be submitted. The document 
and any revisions must be approved by DOE.

--- page 50 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2A 
Page 3-8 1-29-2024 
 
 
60. Training Implementation Matrix (TIM) is a term used at some sites for the Training 
Implementation Document (TID). 
61. T raining Instructor is an individual with duties and responsibilities for instructing 
personnel or developing training materials. 
62. T raining Organization is responsible for supporting the line organization to identify, 
meet, and monitor training needs in support of the facility mission. The training 
organization assists line organizations in performing the systematic approach to training 
(SAT). The training organization may include a training manager, instructional 
technologists, and instructors. 
63. T raining and Qualification Program is a planned, organized sequence of activities 
designed to prepare individuals to perform their jobs, to meet a specific position or 
classification need, and to maintain or improve their performance on the job.
