--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER  
 Washington, DC 
 
 
Approved: 6-20-2011 
Chg 1 (Admin Chg): 11-23-2012 
Chg 2 (Admin Chg): 5-15-2015 
Chg 3 (AdminChg): 9-12-2019 
Chg 4 (LtdChg): 8-22-2023 
 
SUBJECT: INFORMATION SECURITY 
1. PURPOSE. The protection and control of classified information is critical to our nation’s 
security. This Order establishes requirements and responsibilities for Department of 
Energy (DOE) Departmental Elements, including the National Nuclear Security 
Administration (NNSA), to protect and control classified information as required by 
statutes, regulations, Executive Orders, government-wide policy directives and 
guidelines, and DOE policy and directives. Such requirements and responsibilities 
include providing direction to Departmental programs and contractors to ensure that all 
applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives and other requirements are followed or 
achieved, and that classified information is properly protected and controlled. 
2. C ANCE LS/SUPERSEDES. DOE O 471.6 Chg 3, Information Security, dated 9-12-2019. 
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. A PPLICABILITY .  
a.  Departmental Elements. Except as otherwise indicated in this section, the 
requirements in this Order apply to all Departmental Elements that possess, may 
possess, or have authority to possess classified information. 
(1) The Administrator of the NNSA must ensure that NNSA employees 
comply with their responsibilities under this Directive. Nothing in this 
Directive will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s 
authority under section 3212(d) of the National Nuclear Security 
Administration Act (“NNSA Act”) (50 U.S.C. § 2402(d)) to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
(2) This Order applies to the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA). The 
BPA Administrator will assure that BPA employees and contractors 
comply with their respective responsibilities under this directive consistent 
with BPA’s self financing, procurement, and other statutory authorities. 
DOE O 471.6

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
(3) In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities assigned by the 
NNSA Act (50 U.S.C. § 2406) and Executive Order 12344 (February 1, 
1982), codified 50 U.S.C. § 2511, and to ensure consistency throughout 
the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy 
Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee 
requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under 
the Director’s cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(4) The requirements in this Order apply to DOE (and DOE contractor) 
activities and facilities that are subject to licensing and related regulatory 
authority or certification by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
The requirements in this Order should be applied consistent with 
Executive Order 12829, National Industrial Security Program (January 6, 
1993), the 2017 Memorandum of Understanding Between the United 
States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the United States Department 
of Energy and the National Nuclear Security Administration Regarding 
Security Cognizance, Industrial Security Services and Related Activities 
Under the National Industrial Security Program for Operations with 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and Department of Energy and National 
Nuclear Security Administration Contracts or Licenses That Involve 
Classified Information as may be amended or superseded, and related 
memoranda of understanding between NRC and DOE concerning 
classified information, executed in accordance with applicable laws, 
regulations, policies, directives, and requirements. 
(5) Additional direction may apply or take precedence over this Order 
regarding the possession, handling and control of Sensitive 
Compartmented Information. 
b.  DOE Contractors. The  CRD, Attachment 1, sets forth requirements that apply to 
contracts that include the CRD. This CRD, or its requirements, must be included 
in all contracts that involve classified information and contain Department of 
Energy Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) clause 952.204-2, titled Security. A 
violation of the provisions of the contract/CRD relating to the safeguarding or 
security of Restricted Data (RD) or other classified information may result in a 
civil penalty pursuant to subsection a. of section 234B of the Atomic Energy Act 
of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2282b). The procedures for the assessment of 
civil penalties are set forth in Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 
824, Procedural Rules for the Assessment of Civil Penalties for Classified 
Information Security Violations. 
c.  E quivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 471.6. Equivalencies and  exemptions from 
the requirements of this Order must be processed in accordance with DOE O 
251.1, Departmental Directive Program, current version. When conditions 
warrant, equivalencies or exemptions from the requirements in this Order may be 
requested. Requests must be supported by a vulnerability assessment (VA) when 
required by the assets being protected, or by sufficient analysis to form the basis

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 471.6 3 
6-20-2011 
 
for an informed risk management decision.  The analysis must identify 
compensatory measures, if applicable, or alternative controls to be implemented.  
All approved equivalencies and exemptions under this Order must be entered in 
the Safeguards and Security Information Management System (SSIMS) database 
and incorporated into the affected security plan(s). Approved equivalencies and 
exemptions become a valid basis for operation when they have been entered in 
SSIMS and documented in the appropriate security plan, and they must be 
incorporated into site procedures at that time. 
Many DOE safeguards and security (S&S) Program requirements are found in or 
based on regulations issued by Federal agencies, and codified in the CFR or other 
authorities, such as Executive Orders or Presidential Directives. In such cases, the 
process for deviating from those requirements found in the source document must 
be applied. If the source document does not include a deviation process, the DOE 
Office of the General Counsel, or NNSA Office of General Counsel if an NNSA 
element is involved, must be consulted to determine whether deviation from the 
source can be legally pursued. 
4. REQUIREMENTS.  
a. General. 
(1) Classified information in all forms must be protected in accordance with 
all applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives, and other 
requirements. 
(2) NNSA and DOE program offices must provide direction to Federal 
personnel, contractors, and any other organizational elements to ensure 
that all DOE and national policies, objectives, and requirements are 
implemented and achieved. They must also establish or provide direction 
for establishing each Officially Designated Federal Security Authority 
(ODFSA) and Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA) 
necessary to fulfill their respective roles in accordance with all applicable 
delegations and authorities. 
(3) All procedures utilized to protect classified information must be 
documented in security plans. 
(4) Authorized access to classified information requires appropriate clearance, 
relevant access approval, and need to know. 
(5) All classified information must be protected from unauthorized access. 
(6) Methods to deter, detect, respond to, and mitigate unauthorized access to 
classified information must be implemented. 
(7) All classified information, including but not limited to that which is 
generated, received, transmitted, used, stored, reproduced, or permanently

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
placed (buried according to the requirements of this Order) – until it is 
destroyed or otherwise no longer classified – must be protected and 
controlled commensurate with its classification level, category, and 
caveats (if applicable). All pertinent attributes must be used to determine 
the degree of protection and control required to prevent unauthorized 
access to classified information. (Examples of such attributes include, but 
are not limited to size, location, and configuration.) 
(8) All individuals who are authorized for access to classified information 
must receive instruction with respect to their specific security duties as 
necessary to ensure that they are knowledgeable about their 
responsibilities and applicable requirements. 
b. Handling and Protection. Handling and protection procedures must be established, 
documented, and adhered to for classified information throughout its lifecycle 
(which includes origination, classification, marking, accountability, in-use, 
storage, reproduction, transmission, and destruction). 
(1) O rigination and Classification . 
(a) Prior to classification review, information that may be classified 
must be protected at the highest potential classification level and 
category of the information it contains. 
(b) The originator must ensure that a derivative or original classifier 
reviews the information and determines its classification including: 
1 When unsure of the classification level or category of a 
draft or working paper; and 
2 F or all final products that may  contain classified 
information. 
(c) The originator must ensure that all classified matter is 
appropriately marked according to the classification determination. 
(2) Marking. 
(a) Marking Standards. Classified matter must include proper and 
complete classification markings. 
1 C lassified matter must be reviewed and brought up to 
current marking standards whenever it is released by the 
current holder (“current holder” may be an individual, 
specific office, or ad-hoc working group) or removed from 
a state of permanent storage and placed into use.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 471.6 5 
6-20-2011 
 
2 When marking the level or category is not practical, written 
notification of the classification must be furnished to all 
recipients. 
3 D ocuments that contain Transclassified Foreign Nuclear 
Information (TFNI) must be marked TFNI following the 
classification level on the top and bottom of the first page 
and either on subsequent pages containing TFNI or all 
pages, unless such documents (or pages) also contain RD or 
Formerly Restricted Data (FRD). The “Declassify on” line 
of documents containing TFNI must state “Not Applicable 
(or N/A) to TFNI.” Documents containing TFNI and other 
National Security Information (NSI), but no RD or FRD 
must be portion marked. Portions containing TFNI must be 
marked with the level and with the TFNI identifier (e.g., 
S/TFNI). 
4 32 C FR 2001, Classified National Security  Information, 
contains requirements for marking classified NSI 
documents in the electronic environment. 
(b) E xamples . Marking examples may be found in the CMPC Marking 
Resource links at: 
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2020/09/f79/CMPC-
Marking-Resource-April-2020.pdf or 
https://powerpedia.energy.gov/w/images/6/6b/CMPC_Marking_Re
source_April_2020.pdf and  
Marking Classified National Security Information at  
https://www.archives.gov/isoo/training/marking-booklet-
revision.pdf. 
(c) Mixed Levels and Categories. When classified matter contains a 
mix of information at various levels and categories that causes the 
document to be marked at an overall level and category higher than 
the protection level required for any of the individual portions, a 
marking matrix may be used in addition to other required 
markings. (For example, a document that contains Confidential RD 
and Secret NSI would be required to be marked as Secret RD, the 
highest level and most restrictive category, even though none of 
the information in the document is Secret RD.) If the marking 
matrix is used, the following marking, in addition to other required 
markings, must be placed on the first page of text. 
This document contains:

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
• Restricted Data at the (e.g., Confidential) level. 
• Formerly Restricted Data at the (e.g., Secret) level.  
• National Security Information at the (e.g., Secret) level. 
• Classified by: Name and Title 
(d) Portion Marking. When portion marking is required, classified 
matter must be marked in a manner that clearly indicates those 
portions that contain or reveal classified information. 
1 N SI documents (including page changes) dated after 
April 1, 1997, must be portion marked. 
2 A ll NSI documents that are in use (not in approved storage) 
must be portion marked. 
3 D ocuments containing RD or FRD are not required to be 
portion marked. 
(e) S ubjects and Titles. Titles must be marked with the  appropriate 
classification (level; category if RD or FRD; and other applicable 
caveats) or “U” if unclassified, and the marking must be placed 
immediately preceding the item. 
(f) T ransmittal Documents. The first page of a transmittal document 
must be marked with the highest level; most restrictive category (if 
RD or FRD); and other applicable caveats of classified information 
being transmitted and with an appropriate notation to indicate its 
classification when the enclosures are removed. 
(g) W orking Papers. In addition to national requirements for working 
papers, these documents must be marked as “Draft” or “Working 
Paper” on the front cover until they are marked as final documents. 
RD and FRD drafts and working papers also must include the same 
markings as required for NSI drafts and working papers. 
Classification warning information may also be required per DOE 
O 475.2B, Identifying Classified Information or 32 CFR 2001, 
Classified National Security Information. 
Classified documents that are updated on a frequent basis, 
commonly referred to as “living” documents (e.g., documents that 
are part of an ongoing experiment or study) may be considered as 
originating on each date they are changed. Security plans must 
document specific techniques to demonstrate that working papers 
and drafts are “living” documents. 
(h) Other Government Agencies (OGAs) Not Conforming to DOE 
Marking Requirements. Documents received from OGAs that have

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 471.6 7 
6-20-2011 
 
not been marked to conform to DOE requirements do not need to 
be re-marked. However, all documents received must clearly 
indicate a classification level and category (if RD or FRD) or TFNI 
identifiers, when applicable. 
(i) Foreign Governments Not Conforming to DOE Marking 
Requirements. Documents received from foreign governments that 
have not been marked to conform to DOE requirements, do not 
need to be re-marked. However, all documents received must 
clearly indicate a classification level and category (if RD or FRD) 
or TFNI identifiers, when applicable. 
(j) C over Sheets . Cover sheets must be applied to all classified 
documents when they are removed from a secure storage 
repository [standard form (SF) 703 for Top Secret, SF 704 for 
Secret, SF 705 for Confidential, and DOE F 471.2 for Confidential 
Foreign Government Information-Modified Handling Authorized 
(C/FGI-MOD)]. 
(k) M edia. When information is prepared on classified information 
systems, the hard copy output (which includes paper, microfiche, 
film, and other media) must be correctly marked either according 
to its classification per review of the output or as a working paper. 
(3) A ccountability . 
(a) The following types of matter are accountable: 
1 Top Secret matter; 
2 Secret Restricted Data matter stored outside a limited area 
(LA) or higher; and 
3 A ny matter designated as accountable by  national, 
international, or programmatic requirements. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, Sigma 14 and North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) Atomal. 
(b) All accountable matter must be managed such that: 
1 Chain of custody is established, verified, and documented 
from origination or receipt to destruction or transfer outside 
of departmental control; 
2 E ach accountable item can be located at any  given time, 
whether stored or in use (the location of accountable 
classified matter in approved permanent burial must be 
documented, and this matter’s unaccessed status must be 
verifiable); and

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
3 All discrepancies regarding inventories of accountable 
matter are detected and reported to the ODFSA. 
(4) C lassified Information in Use . 
(a) When not in approved storage, all classified information must be 
under the direct control of an individual who meets the 
requirements for authorized access to the information. 
(b) All users of classified information must prevent unauthorized 
physical, visual, aural, cyber, and other access. 
(c) Classified information must only be processed on information 
systems that have received authority to operate at the appropriate 
classification for the information according to DOE Office of the 
Chief Information Officer directives. 
(5) Storage. 
(a) Classified matter must be stored under conditions designed to deter 
and detect unauthorized access to the matter, to include securing it 
in approved equipment or facilities whenever it is not under the 
direct control of an authorized person. 
(b) Requirements for Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) that are used 
for supplemental control are established in DOE physical 
protection directives. 
(c) Requirements for vaults and Vault Type Rooms (VTRs) used for 
open storage of classified matter are established in DOE physical 
protection directives. 
(d) Storage Containers. 
1 Storage containers used to store classified matter must not 
be used to store or contain other items that may be a 
substantial target for theft. 
2 S torage containers used for storing classified matter must 
conform to U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) 
standards and specifications. 
3 C ombinations must be set by an appropriately cleared and 
authorized individual. 
4 C ombinations must be changed as soon as practical 
whenever a current combination may be known by 
someone who does not possess the requisite access

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 471.6 9 
6-20-2011 
 
authorization, formal access approvals, and need to know 
for all of the information stored in the container. 
5 A record must be maintained of each individual who has 
been granted access to any secure storage repository 
combination. 
6 S F 700 Parts 1, 2, and 2A must be completed for each 
secure storage repository or other location approved for 
storing classified matter that uses a combination. 
a The  combination must be available for authorized  
use. 
b T he local implementation plan may  dictate whether 
Block 8, Serial Number of Lock, must be left blank. 
c S F 700 Part 1 must be affixed to the inside of the 
door of vaults and VTRs containing the 
combination lock. For security containers, it must 
be placed inside the locking drawer. 
7 A n SF 702 must be used to record security checks each day 
a container may have been accessed by documenting the 
times and the initials of the person(s) who has opened, 
closed, or checked a particular container, room, vault, or 
VTR holding classified information. 
(e) Top Secret matter must be stored in one of the following three 
ways: 
1 In a locked, GSA-approved security container with one of 
the following supplemental controls: 
a Un der IDS  protection and by protective force (PF) 
personnel responding within 15 minutes of alarm 
annunciation; or 
b I nspections by PF personnel no less frequently than 
every 2 hours. 
2 I n a locked vault or VTR within an LA, exclusion area, 
protected area (PA), or material access area. The vault or 
VTR must be under IDS protection, and PF personnel must 
respond within 15 minutes of alarm annunciation. 
3 I n a locked vault or VTR within a property protection area 
or outside of a security area, and it must be under IDS

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
protection. PF personnel must respond within 5 minutes of 
alarm annunciation. 
(f) Secret matter must be stored: 
1 In any manner authorized for Top Secret matter; 
2 In a locked vault or in a locked GSA-approved security 
container within an LA or higher; or 
3 I n a locked VTR with at least one of the following 
supplemental controls: 
a I nspections by PF  personnel no less frequently than 
every 4 hours; 
b Fo r  a VTR located within a PA or higher security 
area, the PF personnel must respond within 30 
minutes of the VTR’s IDS alarm; 
c F or a VTR located within an LA, the PF personnel 
must respond within a time, not to exceed 30 
minutes of the VTR’s IDS alarm, as established by 
the authorized risk acceptance authority and based 
on: 
1 C oordination with the data owner (data 
owner is defined, for the purpose of this 
information security order, as the DOE or 
NNSA Program Office that has been 
delegated authority for the Secret matter by 
the Secretary of Energy); 
2 C ompletion of a local risk assessment, 
which has determined that the LA provides 
security-in-depth in accordance with the 
definition established in 32 Code of 
Regulations (CFR) 2001; and  
3 D ocumentation of the analysis and decision 
in the security plan. 
(g) Confidential matter must be stored in the same manner prescribed 
for Secret or Top Secret matter. However, the supplemental 
controls are not required. 
(h) Nuclear weapon configurations, nuclear test and trainer devices, 
and nuclear-explosive-like assemblies without nuclear material

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 471.6 11 
6-20-2011 
 
must be stored in a vault or VTR located in an LA or higher 
security area, with: 
1 IDS supplemental control; and 
2 PF personnel must respond within 15 minutes of the IDS 
alarm. 
(i) PF personnel, private security firms, or local law enforcement 
agency personnel must respond to IDS alarms as specified and 
documented in the local security plan. 
(j) Nonconforming storage may only be used for classified matter that 
cannot be protected by the established standards and requirements 
due to its size, nature, operational necessity, or other factors. In 
these exceptional cases, nonconforming storage that deters and 
detects unauthorized access to the classified matter may be used 
for storing classified matter. 
1 Nonconforming storage must result in protection 
effectiveness equivalent to that provided to similar levels 
and categories of classified matter by standard 
configurations. 
2 T he methods, protection measures, and procedures must be 
documented and approved by the ODFSA. 
3 D ocumentation must include the following: 
a An explanation as to why exercising this option is 
necessary; 
b A d e scription of the classified matter to be stored; 
and 
c A n analysis demonstrating the means by which 
equivalent security is to be provided. 
4 C opies of the documentation must be forwarded to  the 
cognizant Headquarters program office. 
(k) Permanent burial is an option that may be approved by the ODFSA 
for permanent placement of classified matter. Permanent 
placement is not a form of destruction for classified matter. In 
addition to meeting the requirements for nonconforming storage of 
classified matter, permanent burial documentation must also 
include:

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
1 For active burial operations, description of the entire 
placement process, including protection of classified matter 
prior to final burial; 
2 C onfiguration of classified matter to be buried; 
3 Assurance that undisturbed burial is designed and will be 
sustained indefinitely for the buried classified matter; and 
4 E xplanation of current and future use of the burial location 
and all pertinent location characteristics (natural or 
engineered) that will limit or preclude access to the 
classified matter. 
(l) Accountable classified matter is considered to meet accountability 
requirements when it is permanently placed into an approved 
burial configuration. 
(6) Reproduction. Procedures for the reproduction of classified matter must be 
established to: 
(a) Limit reproduction of classified matter to the minimum number of 
copies consistent with operational requirements and any other 
pertinent reproduction limitations; and 
(b) Identify equipment authorized in accordance with local procedures 
and cyber security policy. 
(7) Transmission and Receipt. Procedures for the transmission and receipt of 
classified matter must be established to deter, detect, and respond to 
unauthorized access to the matter. In addition to national requirements, 
DOE-specific policy includes: 
(a) Classified mailing addresses must be verified through SSIMS or 
the listing provided by the Defense Counterintelligence Security 
Agency (DCSA). If not in either system, a new classified mail 
channel must be established. 
(b) Hard copy printouts of SSIMS or DSS classified addresses can 
only be used to validate approved classified addresses for 30 
calendar days from the print date. 
(c) Receipts must be used to manage and verify timely delivery of 
matter classified Secret or higher. 
(d) Classified matter may be transmitted by approved electronic 
means. When using this method, both the transmitting and 
receiving systems must be approved for the classification level and

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 471.6 13 
6-20-2011 
 
category of the information to be transmitted. Facilities also must 
have an approved security plan and a procedure(s) for transmitting 
the information by electronic means. 
(e) First class mail is not authorized for transmission of Top Secret or 
Secret classified matter. First class mail also may not be used for 
transmission of Confidential matter to contractor facilities. 
(f) U.S. Postal Service Express Mail is not authorized for transmission 
of Top Secret matter, but may be used to transmit Secret or 
Confidential matter. 
(g) Unless otherwise noted in this Order, DOE authorizes the use of 
the current holders of a GSA contract for overnight delivery of 
information for the Executive Branch as long as all requirements 
are met. 
(h) When using commercial express service organizations for 
transmitting classified matter, the matter must be secured at the 
receiving location the next calendar day. 
1 The use of the express service organization must have been 
approved by the sender’s ODFSA. 
2 A n address for receiving deliveries from the express service 
must have been input into SSIMS for the receiving 
organization if sending classified information to a DOE 
cleared site or if sending Restricted Data. 
3 T he delivery address cannot be a post office box and must 
be a street address. 
4 T he intended recipients must be notified 24 hours in 
advance (or immediately if transit time is less than 24 
hours) of the proposed shipments and arrival dates. 
5 A ll packages must be double- wrapped before being 
inserted into the packaging provided by the commercial 
express service organization. 
6 I n accordance with packaging  requirements, commercial 
express service packages must not be identified as 
classified packages. 
7 T he properly wrapped packages must be hand- carried to the 
express mail dispatch center or picked up from the sender 
in sufficient time to allow for dispatch on the same day.

--- page 14 ---
14 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
8 Commercial express carrier drop boxes must not be used 
for classified packages. 
(i) Common carriers used to transport classified matter must have an 
approved facility clearance (FCL), which is also entered into 
SSIMS. 
(j) Procedures must be developed describing the process for obtaining 
approval to hand-carry outside of a site/facility and for providing 
notification when removing classified matter from the facility. 
Hand- carry procedures must be approved by the ODSA. 
1 A record/receipt of the classified matter to be hand-carried 
must be made before departure. 
2 T he removal of classified matter from  approved facilities to 
private residences or other unapproved places (e.g., hotel or 
motel rooms) is prohibited. 
3 C ontingency plans for delayed arrival must cover 
alternative protection, storage procedures, and reporting 
requirements, and they must be approved by the ODSA. 
Plans must also include disposition/return of the classified 
matter. 
4 R equirements for security screening of classified matter at 
airports are established by the Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA). Requirements for precluding 
unauthorized access to classified information apply in 
addition to those established by TSA. 
5 T o hand- carry classified matter outside the United States, 
the traveler must obtain written authorization from the 
cognizant Departmental Element, who must arrange for 
nonprofessional diplomatic courier status from the U.S. 
Department of State. 
(8) D estruction . 
(a) For destruction, classified matter must be destroyed beyond 
recognition and must not permit subsequent recovery of classified 
information. 
(b) Electronic storage media containing classified information must be 
destroyed in accordance with DOE cyber security directives. 
(c) Destruction of accountable classified matter must be witnessed by 
an appropriately cleared individual, other than the person

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 471.6 15 
6-20-2011 
 
destroying the matter, who has an appropriate security clearance 
for the classification level, category (if RD or FRD), and any 
applicable caveats of the matter to be destroyed. 
Information regarding evaluated media destruction equipment can be 
obtained at:  https://www.nsa.gov./resources/everyoe/media-destruction. 
c. Foreign Government Information. 
(1) Foreign Government Information (FGI) must be safeguarded to provide a 
degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the government, 
international organization of governments, or any element thereof that 
furnished the information. 
(2) FGI to which U.S. information has been added must be reviewed for 
classification by a derivative classifier or classification officer, marked, 
and protected accordingly. 
(3) Confidential Foreign Government Information–Modified Handling 
Authorized (C/FGI-MOD). The Information Security Oversight Office 
provides requirements that must be met when the foreign protection 
requirements are lower than the protection required for U.S. Confidential 
information. 
(4) NATO information must be safeguarded in compliance with the U.S. 
Security Authority for NATO Affairs instructions. 
(5) Modifications to these requirements regarding FGI may be permitted by 
treaties, agreements, or other obligations with the prior written consent of 
the originating government. 
(6) Release or Disclosure of FGI. 
(a) The release or disclosure of any FGI must have the prior consent of 
the originating government, must be coordinated through the 
cognizant DOE Program Office and Office of Environment, 
Health, Safety and Security, and must comply with all applicable 
treaties, agreements, or other obligations. 
(b) Any individual receiving FGI must possess an appropriate security 
clearance and meet need-to-know requirements. 
(c) If the release or disclosure involves FGI produced by or received 
from an OGA, approval must be obtained from that OGA before 
release or disclosure.

--- page 16 ---
16 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
d. Release or Disclosure of U.S. Classified Information to Foreign Governments. 
(1) The multiagency National Disclosure Policy Committee (NDPC), of 
which DOE is a Special Member, governs the export of classified U.S. 
military information and material to foreign governments as provided for 
in international agreements. The NDPC must be informed of international 
agreements involving the sharing of all classified information with foreign 
governments, including those international agreements made under the 
auspices of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. This notification 
must include the provisions of security agreements that apply to the shared 
information. Disclosure of atomic information (which includes RD and 
FRD) must be coordinated with the Joint Atomic Information Exchange 
Group before disclosure. 
(2) Before releasing classified information to any foreign government, DOE 
must determine that furnishing the classified information will result in a 
net advantage to the national security of the United States and comply 
with all applicable treaties, agreements and other obligations. These 
determinations must be made in coordination with the appropriate DOE 
Program Office. 
(3) Before releasing classified information to any foreign government, the 
receiving government must have agreed, in writing, to the following 
stipulations: 
(a) The receiving foreign government must not release the information 
to a third party without the written approval of the releasing party. 
(b) The receiving foreign government will protect the information to 
the same degree of protection as that provided by the releasing 
party. 
(c) The receiving foreign government will use the information only for 
the purpose for which it was given. 
(d) If the releasing party indicates any private rights (such as patents, 
copyrights, or trade secrets) are involved in the information, the 
receiving foreign government will acknowledge such rights. 
(4) In some instances, new documents may be created that contain both U.S. 
classified information and FGI. In this case, unless there is a current 
agreement for cooperation (for RD or FRD) or an appropriate international 
agreement (for NSI) allowing sharing of the specific categories and levels 
of U.S. classified information, the enhanced FGI cannot be returned to the 
originating government or international organization of governments.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 471.6 17 
6-20-2011 
 
(5) All transmittals to a foreign government that involve classified 
information must be made by DOE unless a DOE contractor has prior 
written authorization. 
(6) The method of transmission of classified mail to any foreign government 
must be approved by the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and 
Security. 
(7) Copies of receipts for physical transfer of classified information to foreign 
entities must be contained in memoranda prepared by the Cognizant 
Departmental Element and maintained by the cognizant program office. 
(8) Records of made and/or contemplated oral disclosures must be contained 
in memoranda prepared by the Cognizant Departmental Element and 
maintained by the cognizant program office. 
e. Disclosure and Release in Emergency Situations. In the event that an emergency 
situation necessitates the disclosure of classified information to individuals who 
are not otherwise eligible for access, the following requirements apply. If any of 
these requirements are not met, the DOE or NNSA Office of the General Counsel, 
as appropriate, must be consulted as soon as possible. 
(1) P rotection . 
(a) The amount of classified information disclosed and the number of 
individuals to whom such information is disclosed must be limited 
to the absolute minimum necessary. 
(b) If classified information must be transmitted, it must be transmitted 
via approved channels if possible or through the most secure and 
expeditious method if approved channels are not an option. 
(c) A written description detailing what information is classified and 
the protection requirements for that information must be provided 
to the recipient. 
(d) A briefing must be provided to the recipient(s) covering 
requirements for not disclosing the information. 
(e) A nondisclosure agreement signed by the recipient(s) must be 
obtained. 
(2) Notification and Reporting. The following individuals must be notified as 
soon as possible of any emergency release of classified information to an 
individual or individuals who are otherwise not eligible for such access: 
(a) For RD or FRD: the Director, Office of Environment, Health, 
Safety and Security; the head of the Departmental Element; and the 
Associate Administrator for Defense Nuclear Security; or

--- page 18 ---
18 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
(b) For NSI: the appropriate DOE line management or ODFSA. 
f. Operations Security (OPSEC). OPSEC analyzes and provides corresponding 
information regarding threats, vulnerabilities and potential mitigations or 
solutions to decision-makers at many levels.  This information involves national 
security priorities; DOE-wide authorities and responsibilities; programmatic 
mission needs and local concerns.  DOE’s OPSEC Program is based on 
distributed management whereby this directive establishes DOE OPSEC policy, 
including establishment of one or more DOE OPSEC Coordinating Officials 
(DOCO)s and DOE Program Offices implement the policy for the missions, 
programs, and activities for which they are responsible. 
(1) The DOE OPSEC Program must include one or more DOCO(s) to 
coordinate and communicate consolidated OPSEC deliverables for DOE-
wide or external purposes.  
(2) The DOCO(s) must carry out the OPSEC activities that support inter- and 
intra-organizational needs and initiatives.   
(3) DOE Program Offices must ensure that each mission, site, and facility 
under its purview is covered under an OPSEC program.  Every DOE 
Program Office must: 
(a) Assign and document responsibilities for OPSEC direction, 
management, and implementation. 
(b) Identify, document and protect its Critical Information (CI). 
(c) Mark Critical Information in accordance with classification and 
Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) marking requirements. 
(d) Review and update Critical Information documentation as 
necessary to reflect current assets, threats, operational, and other 
relevant factors. 
(e) Ensure that all Critical Information it possesses or that is under its 
control is protected from inadvertent and unauthorized disclosure. 
(f) Direct its OPSEC programs to provide the information required for 
sound risk-management decisions concerning the protection of 
sensitive information to the decision makers who are responsible 
for mission accomplishment to help deter, detect, and mitigate 
adverse actions of local, DOE or national competitors and 
adversaries. 
(g) Ensure that all individuals covered by its OPSEC programs receive 
instruction with respect to their specific OPSEC duties so that they

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 471.6 19 
6-20-2011 
 
are knowledgeable about and capable of meeting their 
responsibilities and applicable requirements. 
(h) Interface with the DOCO(s) as necessary to fulfill OPSEC needs 
and requirements. 
(i) Facilitate access by external oversight or stakeholders per 
agreements between the external activity, the DOCO(s), and the 
appropriate DOE Program Office(s). 
(j) Integrate OPSEC with counterintelligence and other security 
programs, such as those used to address insider threats, CUI, data 
loss prevention, cybersecurity, Foreign Access Management, 
physical security, industrial security, and information security. 
(4) DOE Program Offices that have the authority and mission to partner with 
State, local, tribal, or territorial government entities or the private sector 
must, where appropriate, inform and support the integration of the 
National OPSEC Program (NOP) into associated operations and activities. 
(5) The DOE OPSEC Program must partner with the intelligence community 
(IC), law enforcement agencies, and other agencies according to DOCO(s) 
and DOE Program Office authorities and as needed to strengthen 
awareness of threats from foreign intelligence operations and other 
adversaries.  Such support shall include raising risk awareness, identifying 
Critical Information and indicators that may be of use to an adversary, 
providing analysis of risks associated with the information, 
recommending, or implementing appropriate countermeasures (including 
measures intended to reduce or eliminate impediments to effective 
cooperation), and preventing unnecessary duplication of effort.  The DOE 
Office of Intelligence is the conduit through which to meet the IC 
requirement.  Other DOE or NNSA offices may also serve as conduits to 
other communities if it is within their responsibilities and is agreed to by 
the DOCO(s). 
(6) OPSEC assessments must be conducted at a frequency not to exceed 36 
months at facilities that possess Category I special nuclear material (or 
credible roll up to a Category I quantity), Top Secret, or Special Access 
Program information within their boundaries. 
(7) Information generated by or for the Federal Government and being placed 
on any website or otherwise being made available to the public must not 
contain Critical Information unless authorized by the Officially 
Designated Federal Security Authority.

--- page 20 ---
20 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.  
a. Deputy Secretary of Energy. Designates one or more DOCO(s) to coordinate and 
communicate consolidated DOE OPSEC deliverables for DOE-wide or external 
purposes.  The official(s) may delegate authority for specific actions or activities 
but remains accountable for associated results. 
b. DOE Operations Security Coordinating Officials (DOCO). Each DOCO is 
responsible for coordinating OPSEC information and activities across DOE 
Program Offices and NNSA to improve coordination, avoid conflict, and facilitate 
efficient use of resources. 
c. O ffice  of Environment, Health, Safety and Security. 
(1) Develops, coordinates, and interprets the Department’s information 
security policy consistent with strategies and policies governing the 
protection of national security and other critical assets entrusted to the 
Department. 
(2) Manages United States government policy standards for Restricted Data 
and Formerly Restricted Data. 
(3) Designates the senior agency official responsible for directing and 
administering the DOE information security program, pursuant to 
Executive Order 13526, section 5.4(d). 
(4) Approves the methods of transmission of classified mail to foreign 
governments. 
(5) Coordinates with program offices regarding the release or disclosure of 
FGI. 
(6) Coordinates with program offices regarding the release or disclosure of 
classified information to foreign government(s). 
(7) Maintains documentation for emergency disclosures involving RD or 
FRD. 
(8) Fulfills program office responsibilities for security at DOE Headquarters. 
d. Office of the Chief Information Officer. 
(1) Provides DOE directives for protection and handling of cyber forms of 
classified information. 
(2) Provides DOE directives for the security of the information systems that 
store classified information.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 471.6 21 
6-20-2011 
 
(3) Provides DOE directives to ensure that classified information is only 
processed on information systems that achieve the appropriate 
requirements for national security systems. 
e. Program Secretarial Offices. Establish implementing direction to their Program 
Offices to ensure that all applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives and 
other requirements are followed or achieved, and that classified information is 
properly protected and controlled. 
f. D OE Program  Offices. 
(1) Implement the senior agency official’s policies for directing and 
administering the DOE information security program (Executive Order 
13526, section 5.4(d)). 
(2) Provide implementing direction to their organizations and contractors to 
ensure that all applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives, and other 
requirements are followed or achieved. 
(3) Approve release or disclosure of FGI. 
(4) Manage and approve the release and disclosure of U.S. classified 
information to foreign governments. 
(5) Maintain documentation for emergency disclosures involving NSI, RD, 
and FRD. 
(6) Designate information security authorities and define their roles and 
responsibilities for their programs, sites, facilities, and operations. 
(7) Ensure that contracting officers incorporate the CRD and all program- 
specific implementing instructions, into those contracts that involve 
classified information, classified matter, or nuclear materials and contain 
DEAR clause 952.204 2, Security Requirements. 
(8) Ensures that approved documentation for their programs, sites, facilities, 
and operations is developed and maintained, including, but not limited to 
the following: 
(a) Security plans; 
(b) Nonconforming storage; 
(c) Release and disclosure of FGI; 
(d) Transport of classified information by a specific individual(s) 
outside the United States; and

--- page 22 ---
22 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
(e) Copies of receipts for physical transfer of classified information to 
foreign governments. 
(9) Provide management, accountability, and oversight of their OPSEC 
program(s). 
(10) Resource and maintain organizational OPSEC programs consistent with 
the level of risk presented to the agency’s mission and activities to 
promote accountability for protecting critical assets. 
g. National Nuclear Security Administration. 
(1) Provides decisions, direction, and guidance regarding the senior agency 
(DOE) official’s policies for directing and administering the DOE 
information security program for NNSA offices and programs (Executive 
Order 13526, section 5.4(d)). 
(2) Provides implementing direction to NNSA organizations and contractors 
to ensure that all applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives, and 
other requirements are followed or achieved. 
(3) Manages and approves the release and disclosure of NNSA classified 
information to foreign country governments. 
(4) Maintains documentation for emergency disclosures involving NSI, RD, 
and FRD. 
(5) Designates information security authorities and defines their roles and 
responsibilities, within NNSA. 
(6) Ensures that contracting officers incorporate the CRD and all program- 
specific implementing instructions, into those contracts that involve 
classified information, classified matter, or nuclear materials and contain 
DOE Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) clause 952.204-2, titled Security 
Requirements. 
(7) Ensures that approved documentation for their programs, sites, facilities, 
and operations is developed and maintained, including, but not limited to 
the following: 
(a) Security plans; 
(b) Nonconforming storage; 
(c) NNSA release and disclosure of FGI; 
(d) Transport of classified information by a specific individual(s) 
outside the United States; and

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 471.6 23 
6-20-2011 
 
(e) Copies of receipts for physical transfer of classified information to 
foreign governments. 
(8) Provide management, accountability, and oversight of NNSA OPSEC 
program(s). 
(9) Resource and maintain organizational OPSEC programs consistent with 
the level of risk presented to the agency’s mission and activities to 
promote accountability for protecting critical assets. 
h. Officially Designated Federal Security Authorities (ODFSAs) and Officially 
Designated Security Authorities (ODSAs). Fulfill requirements and 
responsibilities that are delegated to them. 
i. C ontracting Officers . Upon notification, modify contracts to incorporate program- 
specific implementing instructions from NNSA and DOE program offices into 
those contracts that involve classified information, classified matter, or nuclear 
materials and contain DEAR clause 952.204-2, titled Security Requirements.  
6. R EFERENCES . The following tools may assist in locating DOE and national directives 
that have requirements that apply to the information security topical area. The documents 
provided within each tool may not be the official versions of the associated laws, policy 
and requirements documents, and directives. The current official version of any 
requirements directives must be used when developing policy or procedures. Links or 
references to the official documents or their websites are provided when available. 
a. The Policy Information Resource provides a keyword search to retrieve a list of 
documents containing the keyword(s) entered. The Policy Information Resource 
also supports browsing directives or collections of driver documents. It also 
contains a glossary and acronym collection. The resource may be accessed at: 
https://pir.doe.gov. 
b. The DOE CMPC Marking Resource is an Office of Environment, Health, Safety 
and Security resource and provides examples for marking classified documents. 
The CMPC Marking Resource link can be accessed at:  
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2020/09/f79/CMPC-Marking-
Resource-April-2020.pdf; or  
https://powerpedia.energy.gov/w/images/6/6b/CMPC_Marking_Resource_April_
2020.pdf.  
c. The Information Security Oversight Office Marking Booklet can be found at 
https://www.archives.gov/isoo/training/marking-booklet-revision.pdf.

--- page 24 ---
24 DOE O 471.6 
 6-20-2011 
 
7. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Order, the following definitions apply. 
a. Access. The ability or opportunity to gain knowledge of classified information. 
b. Classified Information. Any knowledge that can be communicated or 
documentary material, regardless of its physical form or characteristics, that has 
been determined pursuant to Executive Order, regulation, or statute to meet 
classification requirements. 
c. C lassified  Matter. Anything in physical form that contains or reveals classified 
information. 
d. C ritical Information . Critical Information is defined in NSPM-28, National 
OPSEC Program. 
e. F oreign Government Information. Foreign Government Information as defined in  
Section 6.1(s) of Executive Order 13526. 
f. O fficially  Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA). ODFSAs are Federal 
employees who possess the appropriate knowledge and responsibilities for each 
situation to which they are assigned through delegation. 
Delegation authority for these positions is originated according to direction from 
the accountable Program Secretarial Officer (or the Secretary or Deputy Secretary 
for Departmental Elements not organized under a Program Secretarial Office), 
who also provides direction for which of the ODFSA positions may be further 
delegated. Each delegation must be documented in written form. It may be 
included in other security plans or documentation approved by or according to 
direction from the accountable principal. Each delegator remains responsible for 
the delegatee’s acts or omissions in carrying out the purpose of the delegation. 
g. Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA). ODSAs are Federal or 
contractor employees that possess the appropriate knowledge and responsibilities 
for each situation to which they are assigned through delegation. 
Delegation of authority for these positions is originated according to direction 
from the accountable Program Secretarial Officer (or the Secretary or Deputy 
Secretary for Departmental Elements not organized under a Program Secretarial 
Office), who also provides direction for which of the ODFSA positions may be 
further delegated. Each delegation must be documented in written form. It may be 
included in other security plans or documentation approved by or according to 
direction from the accountable principal. 
Each delegator remains responsible for the delegatee’s acts or omissions in 
carrying out the purpose of the delegation. 
h. Transclassified Foreign Nuclear Information. Information concerning the atomic 
energy programs of other nations that has been removed from the Restricted Data

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 471.6 25 
6-20-2011 
 
category for use by the intelligence community and is safeguarded as NSI under 
E.O. 13526. Documents marked as containing TFNI are excluded from the 
automatic declassification provisions of the Order until the TFNI designation is 
properly removed by the Department of Energy. 
8. C ONTACT . For information about this Order, contact the Office of Environment, Health, 
Safety and Security at: (301) 903-4642. 
 
B
Y ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 DAVID M. TURK  
 Deputy Secretary 
  l

--- page 26 ---


--- page 27 ---
DOE O 471.6 Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
6-20-2011 Page 1-1 (and Page 1-2) 
 
 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 471.6, INFORMATION SECURITY 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractors must comply with the requirements of 
this contractor requirements document and with National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) and other Department of Energy (DOE) program office direction provided through 
contract. Each contractor is responsible for disseminating the requirements and NNSA or other 
DOE program office direction to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the 
contractor’s and subcontractor’s compliance with the requirements. 
Contractors must protect and handle classified information and critical information in accordance 
with applicable laws, regulations, policies, directives, and other requirements as directed through 
contract by the NNSA or other DOE program office(s). 
A violation of the provisions of the contract/CRD relating to the safeguarding or security of 
Restricted Data or other classified information may result in a civil penalty pursuant to 
subsection of section 234B of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2282b). 
The procedures for the assessment of civil penalties are set forth in 10 CFR Part 824, Procedural 
Rules of the Assessment of Civil Penalties for Classified Information Security Violations.
