--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov  Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy  ORDER 
  Washington, D.C.   
 
Approved: 12-4-2012 
Chg 1 (PgChg): 2-27-2015 
Chg 2 (MinChg): 7-26-2018 
Chg 3 (LtdChg): 11-14-2019 
SUBJECT: FACILITY SAFETY 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish facility and programmatic safety requirements for the 
Department of Energy (DOE), including the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA), for: 
a. Nuclear safety design criteria; 
b. Fire protection; 
c. Criticality safety; 
d. Natural phenomena hazards (NPH) mitigation; and, 
e. Cognizant system engineer (CSE) program. 
Facility safety requirements for explosive, chemical, and industrial hazards are contained 
in other DOE rules and directives. 
2. CANCELLATIONS. This Order (O) cancels: DOE O 420.1C Chg. 2, Facility Safety, 
dated 7-26-08; and DOE O 5480.30 Chg. 1, Nuclear Reactor Safety Design Criteria, 
dated 3-14-01.  
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify, or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless, and until, the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
to substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability. This Order applies to all DOE elements with 
responsibility for design, construction, management, operation, decontamination, 
decommissioning, or demolition of government-owned or government-leased 
facilities and contractor-leased facilities used for DOE mission purposes. 
The NNSA Administrator will ensure that NNSA employees comply with their 
respective responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this Order will be 
construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 
3212(d) of Public Law (Pub. L.) 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2000, to establish Administration-specific policies, unless 
disapproved by the Secretary.  
DOE O 420.1C

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 420.1C 
 12-4-2012 
 
 
b. DOE Contractors. Except for the equivalencies and exemptions in Section 3.c, the 
CRD (see Attachment 1 of this Order) sets forth requirements of this Order that 
will apply to contracts that include the CRD. The CRD, or its requirements, must 
be inserted into all contracts that require design, construction, management, 
operation, decontamination, decommissioning, or demolition of 
government-owned and government-leased facilities. For leased facilities that are 
not nuclear hazard category 1, 2, or 3 facilities, the requirements of the CRD 
apply to the extent determined by the DOE Head of Field Element. 
c. Equivalencies and Exemptions. 
(1) Requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the requirements of this 
Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1D, Departmental 
Directives Program. Central Technical Authority (or designee) 
concurrence is required for both exemptions and equivalencies to the 
requirements of this Order for nuclear facilities. Because this Order affects 
nuclear safety, requests for advice from the Office of Primary Interest (i.e., 
Office of Nuclear Safety) on proposed equivalencies and exemptions for 
nuclear facilities should allow 45 days, in accordance with 
DOE O 251.1D. (Note: This paragraph applies to requirements of this 
Order related to DOE technical standards and industry codes and standards 
that are invoked as required methods by this Order. If such invoked 
technical standards and industry codes include provisions for relief, those 
provisions govern. Authority to review and approve exemptions and 
equivalencies may be delegated in accordance with DOE O 450.2, 
Integrated Safety Management, Appendix A, “Delegations of Authority to 
Perform Safety Management Functions;” such delegations are encouraged 
whenever the field element has sufficient staff and expertise to oversee the 
subject matter.) 
(2) Equivalencies to DOE technical standards, as well as industry codes, and 
standards, determined to be applicable to the facility design or operations 
must demonstrate an equivalent level of safety (i.e., meets or exceeds the 
level of protection) and must be approved by the DOE Head of Field 
Element. The DOE Head of Field Element must follow provisions for 
relief if specified in DOE technical standards and industry codes and 
standards. (Note: Different codes and standards may use different 
terminology for relief; e.g., for building code applications, the terms 
‘modification’ or ‘alternative’ may be substituted for ‘equivalency’.) 
(3) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order (E.O.) 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion 
Program, codified in 50 United States Code (U.S.C.) sections 2406 and 
2511, and to ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval 
Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval 
Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements and

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 420.1C 3 
12-4-2012 
 
 
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director’s 
cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(4) Exemption. This Order does not apply to activities that are regulated by 
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) or a state under an agreement 
with the NRC, including activities certified by the NRC under Section 
1701 of Pub. L. 83-703, Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. DOE 
orders, regulations, technical standards, and/or guidelines will apply to 
activities where the NRC does not exercise regulatory authority or by 
agreement with NRC. 
(5) Exemption. This Order does not apply to transportation activities that are 
regulated by the Department of Transportation. 
(6) Exemption. The following portions of this Order do not apply to 
accelerator facilities that are covered by DOE O 420.2C, Safety of 
Accelerator Facilities: (1) nuclear safety design requirements, and (2) 
system engineer program requirements. 
(7) Exemption. Specific, individual requirements of this Order do not apply to 
Nuclear Explosive and Weapons Surety Program activities, including 
transportation activities, for the prevention of nuclear detonations if 
application of such specific requirements would compromise the safety 
and effectiveness of these activities. In the event of such conflicts between 
specific requirements of this Order and those of DOE O 452.1E, Nuclear 
Explosive and Weapon Surety Program, or DOE O 452.2E, Nuclear 
Explosive Safety, the related requirements of these latter weapons and 
explosives safety directives take precedence. 
(8) Exemption. This Order does not apply to the Bonneville Power 
Administration, in accordance with Secretarial Delegation Order Number 
00-033.00C to the Bonneville Power Administrator and Chief Executive 
Officer. 
(9) Exemption. The design requirements in this Order do not apply to projects 
that have reached a high level of design maturity, as determined by the 
appropriate Head of Departmental Element. Examples of projects that 
have reached a high level of design maturity include projects that have 
completed the Critical Decision (CD)-2 milestone or those projects that 
have completed the CD-1 milestone with a high level of design maturity. 
This exemption is provided to control project costs; new design 
requirements in this Order may be considered for inclusion where they 
provide significant benefits and/or net cost savings. 
(10) Exemption. This Order does not apply to off-site office facilities that are 
owned or leased by the General Services Administration.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 420.1C 
 12-4-2012 
 
 
d. Government-Owned, Government-Operated Facilities. The CRD (see 
Attachment 1 of this Order) sets forth requirements that must also be applied to 
DOE government-owned, government-operated facilities. Government operators 
must comply with the requirements in the CRD, as set forth in Attachment 1 of 
this Order. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. DOE Elements must: 
a. Approve and oversee contractor programs, as specified in Section 5 of this Order. 
b. Implement the requirements in Attachment 1 of this Order for government-owned 
government-operated facilities. 
c. Provide oversight of the contractor CSE program and the operability of safety 
systems under the purview of the CSE program. 
d. Document any operational responsibilities that are assigned to the contractor 
regarding the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) for matters involving fire 
protection as defined by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes. 
e. Document any authorities associated with the building code official, as defined in 
DOE-STD-1066-2016, Fire Protection, that are assigned to the contractor. 
f. Establish an integrated site-wide wildland fire management plan, consistent with 
the relevant portions of the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. 
g. Direct its contractors, as applicable, to use DOE-STD-3009-2014, Preparation of 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety Analysis, for preparing 
documented safety analyses (DSAs), when the DOE-STD-3009 method is used to 
satisfy 10 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 830, Nuclear Safety 
Management, requirements for new DOE non-reactor nuclear facilities and major 
modifications1 to existing DOE non-reactor nuclear facilities. The appropriate 
Head of Departmental Element, or designee, with concurrence by the applicable 
Central Technical Authority, may approve use of DOE-STD-3009-94, 
Preparation Guide for U.S. Department of Energy Nonreactor Nuclear Facility 
Documented Safety Analyses, Chg. Notice 3, for major modifications to existing 
non-reactor nuclear facilities, with the condition that the approach to chemical 
safety and worker safety is consistent with that described in Appendices B and C 
of DOE-STD-1189-2008, Integration of Safety into the Design Process. 
h. Direct its contractors, as applicable, to carry out the analysis prescribed in 
Section 3.3.1 of DOE-STD-3009-2014 pertaining to “Existing Facilities with 
Mitigated Offsite Consequence Estimates over the EG,” and include the results of 
 
1 10 CFR 830.3 defines major modification as follows: “Major modification means a modification to a DOE nuclear 
facility that is completed on or after April 9, 2001 that substantially changes the existing safety basis for the 
facility.” DOE-STD-1189-2016, Integration of Safety into the Design Process, provides a process to use to 
identify major modifications and examples of major modifications.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 420.1C 5 
12-4-2012 
 
 
this analysis in applicable DSAs for existing DOE nuclear facilities and activities, 
whenever the safety analysis concludes that the mitigated off-site dose 
consequences for one or more accident scenarios exceed the Evaluation Guideline 
of 25 rem. 
i. Review and approve safety basis and safety design basis documents in accordance 
with DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety 
Basis and Safety Design Basis Documents. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Heads of Departmental Elements, and Administrator, National Nuclear Security 
Administration. 
(1) Ensure that the requirements of this Order and the CRD are implemented 
for facilities, activities, or programs under their cognizance. Review and, 
where justified, approve requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the 
requirements of this Order, processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1D. 
(2) In accordance with Section 3.c.(1) of this Order, approve the basis for not 
including multiple physical barriers to prevent or mitigate the unintended 
release of radioactive materials to the environment, as part of the hazard 
category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facility designs, where justified by sound 
technical basis. 
(3) Review and approve safety basis and safety design basis documents in 
accordance with DOE-STD-1104-2016. 
b. Associate Under Secretary, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security. 
(1) Develops and maintains policy, requirements, guidance, and technical 
standards relating to this Order and the CRD. 
(2) Provides technical advice and assistance on the implementation of policy, 
requirements, guidance, and technical standards related to this Order and 
the CRD. 
(3) Provides comments on requests for exemptions from requirements of this 
Order. 
c. Director, Office of Enterprise Assessments. 
Plans and conducts independent oversight reviews of implementation of the 
requirements of this Order and the CRD (see DOE O 226.1B, Implementation of 
Department of Energy Oversight Policy, and DOE O 227.1A, Independent 
Oversight Program, for details). 
d. Heads of Field Elements.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 420.1C 
 12-4-2012 
 
 
(1) Ensure that the facilities, activities, and programs under their purview 
operate in compliance with the requirements of this Order and the CRD. 
(2) Identify contracts to which the CRD applies and notify contracting officers 
when contracts are affected by this Order. 
(3) Review and, where justified, approve equivalencies to DOE technical 
standards and industry codes and standards determined to be applicable to 
the facility design or operations. 
(4) Approve contractor emergency services organization baseline needs 
assessments (BNAs) that meet the requirements in Attachment 2, Chapter 
II, Section 3.e.(1) of this Order. 
(5) Approve contractor fire protection programs (this may be accomplished in 
conjunction with 10 CFR Part 851, Worker Health and Safety Program) 
and Wildland Fire Management Plans. 
(6) Fulfill the roles and responsibilities for the AHJ for matters involving fire 
protection, as defined by the NFPA, including documentation of any 
delegation or assignment of related responsibilities (See Section 5.2.4 of 
DOE-STD-1066-2016, for further discussion of delegations). 
(7) Fulfill the roles and responsibilities for the building code official, as 
defined in DOE-STD-1066-2016, including documentation of any 
delegation or assignment of related responsibilities. 
(8) Perform responsibilities of ‘owner,’ or other equivalent term in the 
application of DOE technical standards or industry codes and standards, 
including documentation of any delegation or assignment of related 
responsibilities. 
(9) Approve contractor’s criticality safety program documentation, ensure that 
it meets requirements in Chapter III of Attachment 2 of this Order. (This 
may be accomplished through the safety basis documentation approval 
process.) 
(10) Approve periodic NPH assessment evaluations, any recommended update 
actions, and any recommended upgrade plans, in accordance with Chapter 
IV of Attachment 2 of this Order. 
(11) Provide oversight for contractor CSE programs and the operability of 
associated safety systems. 
(12) Consistent with DOE O 226.1B, establish and implement an appropriate 
self-assessment and oversight program for the elements of this Order.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 420.1C 7 
12-4-2012 
 
 
(13) When delegated, review and approve safety basis and safety design basis 
documents in accordance with DOE-STD-1104-2016. 
e. Contracting Officers. 
Incorporate the CRD, or its requirements, into affected contracts and procurement 
requests in a timely manner when notified. 
f. Central Technical Authorities. 
(1) Review and, where justified, concur on requests for equivalencies and 
exemptions to the requirements of this Order, processed in accordance 
with DOE O 251.1D. 
(2) Provide support, as requested by the DOE Heads of Field Element, on 
review of equivalencies to DOE technical standards and industry codes 
and standards determined to be applicable to the facility design or 
operations. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS. The following DOE technical standards and industry 
standards are invoked as required methods in this Order in accordance with the 
applicability and conditions described within this Order. Any technical standard or 
industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by this Order, but is not included in 
the list below, is not invoked by this Order. Note: DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J provides a 
definition for “invoked technical standard.” 
a. DOE Standard (STD)-3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility 
Documented Safety Analysis. This DOE technical standard is required to be used 
for specified new non-reactor hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities and 
major modifications to hazard category 1, 2, and 3 non-reactor nuclear facilities. 
In addition, Section 3.3.1 of this technical standard is required to be used for 
existing DOE nuclear facilities that have mitigated off-site dose estimates greater 
than 25 rem. See Section 4 and Attachment 1 for specific requirements. 
b. DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety Basis and 
Safety Design Basis Documents. This DOE technical standard is required to be 
used by DOE personnel for review and approval of safety basis and safety design 
basis documents. See Section 4 for specific requirements. 
c. DOE-STD-1189-2016, Integration of Safety into the Design Process. This DOE 
technical standard is required to be used for development and integration of safety 
analysis and supporting design for new hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear 
facilities and major modifications to existing hazard category 1, 2 and 3 nuclear 
facilities. See Attachment 2, Chapter I for specific requirements. 
d. DOE-STD-3007-2017, Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities. This DOE technical standard is required to be

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 420.1C 
 12-4-2012 
 
 
used for conduct of criticality safety evaluations at DOE facilities and activities 
with the potential for inadvertent criticalities, unless another documented method 
is approved by DOE. See Attachment 2, Chapter III for specific requirements. 
e. DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design 
Criteria for DOE Facilities. This DOE technical standard is required to be used 
for developing the design of new facilities and major modifications. See 
Attachment 2, Chapter IV for specific requirements. 
f. American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear Society 
(ANS)-8 Nuclear Criticality Safety Standards. This set of industry standards is 
required to be satisfied by Criticality Safety Programs for facilities and activities 
with the potential for inadvertent criticalities, unless otherwise modified and 
approved by DOE. See Attachment 2, Chapter III for specific requirements. 
g. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 379-2014, IEEE Standard 
for Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating 
Station Safety Systems. This industry standard is required to be applied to the 
design of safety-class structures, systems, and components (SSCs) for new 
nuclear facilities and major modifications, unless another applicable standard is 
approved by DOE. See Attachment 3 for specific requirements. 
h. IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Equipment for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations. This industry standard is required to be used 
to ensure environmental qualifications of safety-class SSCs for new nuclear 
facilities and major modifications, unless another applicable standard is approved 
by DOE. See Attachment 3 for specific requirements. 
i. IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria for Independence of Class IE Equipment 
and Circuits. This industry standard is required to be used for new nuclear 
facilities and major modifications for physical and electrical separation methods, 
including the use of separation distance, barriers, electrical isolation devices, or 
any combination thereof, unless another applicable standard is approved by DOE. 
See Attachment 3 for specific requirements. 
7. APPLICABLE STANDARDS. An applicable DOE technical standard or industry code 
or standard is one for which it has been determined by the contractor that it will be used 
or will be applied for a specific facility/site to meet the design, construction, and 
operational requirements described in this Order. This Order provides the process for 
determining which standards will be applicable (as described in the Attachments to this 
Order). DOE approves the contractor’s list of applicable DOE technical standards or 
industry codes or standards via different means, including approval of safety design 
documents, the fire protection program, and inclusion of the DOE technical standards or 
industry codes or standards in the contract. 
Once a standard is identified as applicable, this Order requires that the applicable 
requirements of the applicable standards be followed unless relief is obtained. The

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 420.1C 9 
12-4-2012 
 
 
provisions for relief (exemptions and equivalencies) for applicable standards are different 
than the relief provisions for invoked standards, and are described in Section 3.c and 
Attachment 1, Section 2. Together, the invoked standards, the applicable standards, and 
any other applicable DOE requirement documents, along with any exemptions and 
equivalencies, make up the “Code of Record” for a given project or design, and reflect 
DOE’s commitment to standard-based safety management. 
8. REFERENCES AND ACRONYMS. References and acronyms can be found in 
Attachment 4 of this Order. 
9. CONTACT. Address inquiries to the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and 
Security; Office of Nuclear Safety, 301-903-3331. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 DAN R. BROUILLETTE 
 Deputy Secretary

--- page 10 ---


--- page 11 ---
DOE O 420.1C Attachment 1 
12-4-2012 Page 1 
 
 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 420.1C, FACILITY SAFETY 
This Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) includes requirements outlined in Attachments 
2 and 3 of Department of Energy (DOE) Order (O) 420.1C, Facility Safety, referenced in and 
made a part of this CRD, and which provide program requirements and/or information applicable 
to contracts in which this CRD is inserted. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
a. This CRD establishes facility safety requirements for design, construction, 
operation, management, decontamination, decommissioning, and demolition of 
DOE sites or facilities.  Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractors 
are responsible for complying with the requirements of this CRD.  The 
contractors are responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD to 
subcontractors at any tier, to the extent necessary, to ensure the contractors’ 
compliance with the requirements.  
b. Contractors must satisfy the requirements set forth in Attachments 2 and 3 of 
DOE O 420.1C. 
c. For design and construction activities, contractors must identify the applicable 
industry codes and standards, including the International Building Code (IBC), 
and the applicable DOE requirements and technical standards.  If approved by the 
responsible DOE Head of the Field Element, state, regional, and local building 
codes may be used in lieu of the IBC upon contractor submission of 
documentation providing a basis that demonstrates that implementation of the 
substituted code for the specific application will meet or exceed the level of 
protection that would have been provided by the IBC.  Additionally, 
DOE O 413.3B Chg. 5, Program and Project Management for the Acquisition of 
Capital Assets, requires nuclear projects to establish and maintain a Code of 
Record (COR) early in project design for identifying applicable industry codes 
and standards.  For leased facilities that are not nuclear hazard category 1, 2, or 3 
facilities, the requirements of this paragraph apply to the extent determined by the 
DOE Head of Field Element.   
d. Contractors must satisfy the requirements (i.e., mandatory statements) in DOE 
technical standards and industry codes and standards that are identified as 
applicable in accordance with Section 1.c. above, unless relief is approved in 
accordance with Section 2, below.  
e. When the DOE-STD-3009 methodology is used to satisfy 10 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management, contractors must 
prepare Documented Safety Analyses (DSAs) in accordance with DOE-STD-
3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety 
Analysis, for new DOE non-reactor nuclear facilities and major modifications to 
existing DOE non-reactor nuclear facilities.  Note: for such major modifications

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 420.1C 
Page 2 12-4-2012 
 
 
to existing non-reactor nuclear facilities, the appropriate Head of Departmental 
Element, with concurrence by the applicable Central Technical Authority, may 
approve use of DOE-STD-3009-94, Preparation Guide for U.S. Department of 
Energy Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety Analyses, Chg. Notice 3. 
f. Contractors must carry out the analysis prescribed in Section 3.3.1 of DOE-STD-
3009-2014 and include the results of this analysis in applicable DSAs for existing 
DOE nuclear facilities and activities whenever the safety analysis concludes that 
the mitigated off-site dose consequences for one or more accident scenarios 
exceed the Evaluation Guideline of 25 rem.  
2. RELIEF FROM REQUIREMENTS, CODES AND STANDARDS.  
a. Requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the requirements of this attachment 
are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1D, Departmental Directives 
Program.  For such equivalencies and exemptions, DOE O 251.1D requires 
approval, in consultation with the Office of Primary Interest, by the responsible 
Head of Departmental Element or designee, or in the case of NNSA, by the 
Administrator or designee.  Because this Order affects nuclear safety, requests for 
advice from the Office of Primary Interest (i.e., Office of Nuclear Safety) on 
proposed equivalencies and exemptions for nuclear facilities should allow 45 
days, in accordance with DOE O 251.1D.  Requests for equivalencies and 
exemptions to the requirements of this attachment must be provided to the 
responsible contracting officer to facilitate DOE review.  (Note: The requirements 
in this paragraph also address the requirements of this attachment, and those in 
Attachments 2 and 3, that relate to DOE technical standards and industry codes 
and standards that are invoked as required methods.) 
b. Equivalencies to DOE technical standards and industry codes and standards 
determined to be applicable to the facility design or operations must demonstrate 
an equivalent level of safety (i.e., meets or exceeds the level of protection) and be 
approved by the DOE Head of Field Element or designee.   
3. REFERENCES AND ACRONYMS.  Attachment 4 of DOE O 420.1C provides a list of 
references and acronyms.  Reference documents that may be helpful in implementing this 
Order include rules, directives, guidance, DOE technical standards, and industry codes 
and standards.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012 Page i (and Page ii) 
 
 
FACILITY SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
This attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with the Department of 
Energy (DOE) Order (O) 420.1C, Facility Safety, as well as information and/or requirements 
applicable to contracts into which the associated Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), 
(see Attachment 1 of DOE O 420.1C) is inserted.

--- page 14 ---


--- page 15 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012 Page I-1 
 
 
CHAPTER I. NUCLEAR SAFETY DESIGN CRITERIA 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for safety design of DOE hazard category 1, 2, 
and 3 nuclear facilities to support implementation of DOE Policy (P) 420.1, Department 
of Energy Nuclear Safety Policy.2  
The requirements of this chapter (and the criteria in Attachment 3 of DOE O 420.1C) 
support implementation of the requirements for hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear 
facilities in 10 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management, 
Subpart B, Safety Basis Requirements. 
2. APPLICABILITY. 
a. This chapter applies to the design and construction of: 
(1) new hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as defined by 
10 CFR Part 830; and 
(2) major modifications to hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as 
defined in 10 CFR Part 830, that could substantially change the facility 
safety basis (Note: See DOE Standard (STD)-1189-2016, Integration of 
Safety into the Design Process, for criteria and discussion on major 
modifications). 
b. This chapter does not impose requirements on existing facilities, except for major 
modifications3 to those facilities. The requirements of this chapter may be used to 
develop comparisons of existing facilities to the requirements for new facilities, as 
one aide to judgment when evaluating the costs and benefits of non-mandatory 
upgrades to existing facilities. 
c. Except for the requirements of Section 3.b.(3), this chapter does not apply to 
nuclear deactivation or decontamination and decommissioning activities at 
end-of-facility-life if the safety analysis demonstrates that adequate protection is 
provided consistent with the requirements of 10 CFR Part 830 through alternate 
means and it is not cost beneficial to apply the provisions of this chapter for the 
limited remaining life of the activity. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Integration of Safety with Design. 
(1) Safety analysis and supporting design must be developed and integrated in 
accordance with DOE-STD-1189-2016. 
 
2 DOE’s nuclear safety policy (DOE P 420.1, Department of Energy Nuclear Safety Policy) is to design, 
construct, operate, and decommission its nuclear facilities in a manner that ensures adequate protection of 
workers, the public, and the environment.  
3 DOE-STD-1189-2016, Integration of Safety into the Design Process, provides a definition and examples of major 
modifications.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page I-2  12-4-2012 
 
 
(2) Safety analyses must be used to: 
(a) identify safety class and safety significant structures, systems, and 
components (SSCs) needed to fulfill the safety functions in order 
to prevent and/or mitigate design basis accidents (DBAs), 
including natural and man-induced hazards and events; 
(b) identify the safety functional requirements of the safety class and 
safety significant SSCs; and 
(c) identify specific administrative controls (SACs) needed to fulfill 
safety functions. (Note: See DOE-STD-1186-2016, Specific 
Administrative Controls). 
b. Nuclear Facility Design. 
(1) The nuclear facility design must include multiple layers of protection (as 
part of the design defense-in-depth) to prevent or mitigate the unintended 
release of radioactive materials into the environment. 
(2) Defense-in-depth must include all of the following: 
(a) choosing an appropriate site; 
(b) minimizing the quantity of material-at-risk; 
(c) applying conservative design margins; 
(d) applying quality assurance; 
(e) using successive/multiple physical barriers for protection against 
radioactive releases (Note: If an exemption to having multiple 
barriers is required, it is the responsibility of the Head of 
Departmental Element to approve, or disapprove, the exemption 
for not including multiple physical barriers); 
(f) using multiple means to ensure safety functions are met by—  
1 controlling processes; 
2 maintaining processes in safe status; 
3 providing preventive and/or mitigative controls for 
accidents with the potential for radiological releases; and 
4 providing means for monitoring facility conditions to 
support recovery from upset or accident conditions;

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012 Page I-3 
 
 
5 using equipment in combination with administrative 
controls that— 
a restrict deviation from normal operations; 
b monitor facility conditions during and after an 
event; and 
c provide for response to accidents to achieve a safe 
condition; 
6 providing means to monitor accident releases as required 
for emergency response (see DOE O 151.1D, 
Comprehensive Emergency Management System, for 
detailed requirements); and 
7 establishing emergency plans for minimizing the effects of 
an accident (see DOE O 151.1D for detailed requirements). 
(3) Hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities with uncontained radioactive 
materials (as opposed to materials determined by safety analyses to be 
adequately contained within qualified drums, grout, or vitrified materials) 
must have the means to confine the uncontained radioactive materials to 
minimize their potential release in facility effluents during normal 
operations and during and following accidents, up to and including DBAs. 
Confinement design must include the following: 
(a) For a specific nuclear facility, the number, arrangement, and 
characteristics of confinement barriers as determined on a case-by 
case basis. 
(b) The type, quantity, form, and conditions for dispersing the 
radioactive material in the confinement system design. 
(c) An active confinement ventilation system as the preferred design 
approach for nuclear facilities with potential for radiological 
release.4 Alternate confinement approaches may be acceptable if a 
technical evaluation demonstrates either that the alternate 
confinement approach results in very high assurance of the 
confinement of radioactive materials or that an active confinement 
system provides no benefits. 
Guidance for confinement ventilation systems and evaluation of 
the alternatives is provided in DOE Guide (G) 420.1-1A, 
Nonreactor Nuclear Safety Design Guide for Use with 
DOE O 420.1C, Facility Safety. Some facilities where the only 
 
4 The safety classification (if any) of the ventilation system is determined by the facility DSA.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page I-4  12-4-2012 
 
 
radioactive hazard/material is tritium have determined there is no 
benefit from an active confinement ventilation system. 
(4) Hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities must be designed to: 
(a) facilitate safe deactivation, decommissioning, decontamination, 
and demolition at the end of facility life, including incorporation of 
design considerations during the operational period that facilitate 
future decontamination and decommissioning; 
(b) facilitate inspections, testing, maintenance, repair, and replacement 
of safety SSCs as part of a reliability, maintainability, and 
availability program with the objective of maintaining the facility 
in a safe state; 
(c) keep occupational radiation exposures within regulatory limits, and 
as low as reasonably achievable; and 
(d) provide hazard controls for prevention and mitigation of hazardous 
material releases and for defense in depth, consistent with the 
hierarchy described in DOE-STD-1189-2016. 
(5) Facility process systems must be designed to minimize waste production 
and mixing of radioactive and non-radioactive wastes. 
(6) Safety SSCs and safety software must be designed to perform their safety 
functions when called upon. 
(7) Active safety class systems must be designed to meet single failure5 
criterion. 
(8) DOE G 420.1-1A, Nonreactor Nuclear Safety Design Criteria for Use 
with DOE O 420.1C, Facility Safety, provides an acceptable method to 
meet the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(9) Critical experiments facilities must be designed and operated in 
accordance with applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
and the American Nuclear Society (ANS) standards. ANSI/ANS-1-2000 
(R2012), Conduct of Critical Experiments, and ANSI/ANS-14.1-2004 
(R2014), Operation of Fast Pulse Reactors, are two such standards that 
may be applicable. 
 
5 IEEE 379-2014, IEEE Standard Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating Station 
Safety Systems, provides a definition of the single failure criterion. ANS 58.9-2002 (R2009),  Single Failure 
Criteria for Light Water Reactor Safety-Related Fluid Systems, provides additional guidance for single failure 
criteria for mechanical systems.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012 Page I-5 
 
 
(10) Facility design must also be integrated with other design requirements, as 
applicable, including explosive safety, industrial safety, and nuclear 
explosive safety (if applicable).

--- page 20 ---


--- page 21 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page II-1 
 
 
CHAPTER II. FIRE PROTECTION 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for comprehensive fire protection programs for 
DOE facilities and emergency response organizations to: 
a. Minimize the likelihood of occurrence of a fire-related event; 
b. Minimize the consequence of a fire-related event affecting the public, workers, 
environment, property and missions; and 
c. Provide a level of safety protection consistent with the “highly protected risk” 
class of industrial risks. 
2. APPLICABILITY. This chapter applies to organizations that have responsibility for the 
design, construction, maintenance, or operation of government-owned or 
government-leased facilities and contractor-leased facilities used for DOE mission 
purposes. For leased facilities that are not nuclear hazard category 1, 2, or 3 facilities, the 
requirements of this chapter apply to the extent determined by the DOE Head of Field 
Element. (Note: DOE-STD-1066-2016, Fire Protection, provides guidance on a graded 
approach to fire protection for leased facilities.) 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General Fire Protection Program Requirements. 
(1) Policy Statement. A policy must be established that affirms the 
contractor’s commitment to provide a comprehensive fire protection and 
emergency response program that meets the requirements of this chapter, 
related DOE directives, and other applicable requirements. 
(2) Codes and Standards. The codes and standards determined to be 
applicable, including DOE technical standards, the building code, National 
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes and standards, and other 
industry codes and standards, must be identified in the fire protection and 
emergency response programs. The fire protection and emergency 
response programs may specify provisions for relief (exemptions and 
equivalencies) from identified, applicable fire protection codes and 
standards; otherwise, see Attachment 1, Section 2 for relief provisions. 
(a) Facilities, and major modifications thereto, must be constructed to 
meet applicable codes and standards that are in effect when design 
criteria are approved (otherwise known as the Code of Record, or 
COR). Other facility changes must meet the most recent applicable 
codes and standards to the extent determined by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction (AHJ).

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page II-2 12-4-2012 
 
 
(b) Provisions of subsequent editions of codes or standards 
(promulgated after the COR is established) are mandatory only to 
the extent that they are explicitly stated to be applicable to existing 
facilities. 
(c) Conflicts between DOE O 420.1C; NFPA codes and standards; and 
the applicable building code must be resolved as follows: 
1 Requirements of DOE O 420.1C take precedence over all 
NFPA and building code requirements and are subject to 
the relief requirements of DOE O 420.1C. 
2 Conflicts between NFPA requirements and the applicable 
building code requirements are resolved by the DOE Head 
of Field Element, consistent with DOE-STD-1066-2016, 
and in consultation with designated building code and fire 
protection subject matter experts. 
b. Fire Protection Program Administration. 
(1) Documentation. A documented fire protection program that includes the 
elements and requirements identified in this chapter for design; operations; 
emergency response; fire analysis and assessments; wildland fire; and 
specific fire protection program criteria must be developed, implemented, 
and maintained by the contractor. Contractor must submit this documented 
fire protection program to the DOE Head of Field Element for review and 
approval (Note: this may be accomplished in conjunction with submittals 
required by 10 CFR Part 851, Worker, Health and Safety Program). 
(2) Fire Protection Methods. Fire Protection Programs must describe the 
methods used to implement the requirements of this chapter. 
DOE-STD-1066-2016 is the applicable fire protection standard for use at 
DOE facilities. [Note: Relief provisions for applicable fire protection 
standards are described in Section 3.a.(2) above.] 
(3) Self-Assessments. A documented comprehensive self-assessment of the 
fire protection program must be performed at least every three years, or at 
a frequency with appropriate justification approved by the DOE Head of 
Field Element. 
c. Design. 
(1) Design Process. A process must be established to ensure that fire 
protection program requirements are documented and incorporated into 
plans and specifications for design of new facilities and modifications to 
existing facilities.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page II-3 
 
 
(2) Protection Thresholds6. 
(a) New facilities (non-relocatable) exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. of floor 
area must be of Type I or Type II construction, as defined in the 
applicable building codes. 
(b) Automatic fire suppression systems must be provided throughout 
new facilities exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area or where a 
Maximum Possible Fire Loss (MPFL) exceeds $5.9 million (in 
2018 dollars7), unless a specific provision of an applicable NFPA 
code provides different criteria for coverage (such as elimination 
of sprinklers from a small closet). 
(c) Automatic fire suppression systems must be provided throughout 
facilities in which any of the following conditions exist: 
1 where required by safety basis document (for example, to 
prevent loss of safety functions or provide 
defense-in-depth); 
2 significant life safety hazards; 
3 where fire may cause unacceptable mission or program 
interruption if automatic fire suppression systems are not 
provided; 
4 where a modification to an existing facility would cause the 
MPFL to exceed $5.9 million (in 2018 dollars) for the 
facility; or 
5 where a modification to an existing facility results in 
facility floor area that exceeds 5,000 sq. ft. 
(d) For property protection, multiple fire protection approaches, such 
as a fire suppression system and a fire detection and alarm system, 
must be provided in areas where the MPFL exceeds $177 million 
(in 2018 dollars) (refer to DOE-STD-1066-2016). 
(e) For property protection, fire areas must be established such that the 
MPFL for each fire area does not exceed $412 million (in 2018 
 
6 Some of the requirements in this section on protection thresholds may not apply to portions of subterranean 
facilities that otherwise meet the requirements in Appendix D of DOE-STD-1066-2016.  
7 DOE G 413.3-21 Chg. 1, Cost Estimating Guide, Section 6.4.4 provides guidance on historical cost estimates and 
historical cost indexes. To convert 2018 dollar amounts to present value, an applicable historical cost index is 
selected, documented, and used, as described in DOE G 413.3-21.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page II-4 12-4-2012 
 
 
dollars). Fire walls or other separation approaches may be used to 
meet this requirement. 
(3) Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems. 
(a) Fire Suppression. The inadvertent operation or failure of fire 
suppression systems must not result in the loss of function of 
safety class or safety significant systems. (Note: This requirement 
addresses proper design of the fire suppression system to ensure it 
does not impact safety systems and is not intended to drive need 
for redundancy in safety significant system design.) 
(b) Fire Barriers. Complete fire-rated construction and barriers, 
commensurate with the applicable codes and/or safety basis 
requirements, must be provided to isolate hazardous areas and 
minimize fire spread and loss potential consistent with limits as 
established in this chapter. Fire barrier locations and construction 
must be documented. 
(c) Fire Detection. Automatic fire detection must be provided to the 
extent required by applicable industry codes and standards. 
(d) Life Safety. Requirements for life safety and means of egress are 
provided in 10 CFR Part 851. Other codes and standards, such as 
the International Building Code (IBC), and NFPA 101, Life Safety 
Code, may also be applicable. 
(e) Water Supply and Distribution. A reliable and adequate water 
supply and distribution system must be provided for fire 
suppression, as documented through appropriate analysis. 
(f) Emergency Notification. A means to notify responders and 
building occupants of a fire must be provided (e.g., fire alarm 
signaling system and/or site-wide mass notification capabilities for 
major incidents affecting the site). 
(4) Special Hazards. Fire protection systems or features, and appropriate 
procedures to address fire and related hazards that are special or unique to 
DOE and not addressed by industry codes and standards, must be 
established. 
d. Operations. 
(1) Criteria and Procedures. Comprehensive, written fire protection criteria 
and procedures must be established to implement the fire protection 
program requirements that include:

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page II-5 
 
 
(a) site-specific requirements; 
(b) staff organization, resources, training, and roles and 
responsibilities; 
(c) inspection, testing, and maintenance of fire protection systems; 
(d) use and storage of combustible, flammable, radioactive, and 
hazardous materials; 
(e) a “hot-work” control program; 
(f) identification and tracking of fire protection system impairments; 
(g) fire prevention measures (e.g., reduced combustible loading, 
hot-work procedures, ignition source controls); 
(h) facility and Fire Hazards Analysis (FHA) assessment programs; 
(i) design and construction oversight; and 
(j) equivalencies, exemptions, modifications, and variances processes. 
(2) Implementation. To ensure effective implementation of these 
requirements, the following elements must be addressed. 
(a) Staffing. The contractor must ensure it has access to qualified, 
trained fire protection staff (that includes fire protection engineers 
(FPEs), technicians, and firefighting personnel) needed to 
implement the requirements of this chapter. 
(b) Design Review. Documented review of plans, specifications, 
procedures, and acceptance tests must be conducted by an FPE 
(Note: A definition for FPE is provided in DOE-STD-1066-2016). 
A process must be established to oversee fire protection-related 
activities from conceptual design to final acceptance. 
(c) Equivalencies and Exemptions. A process must be established for 
developing and requesting AHJ approval of fire protection 
equivalencies and exemptions to fire protection requirements. 
Records of technical justification must be maintained and 
reevaluated for appropriateness as activities or operations change. 
(d) Assigned Authority. If assigned, the contractor must document the 
level of authority to execute the duties and responsibilities of the 
AHJ, in accordance with the contractor’s overall fire protection 
and emergency response programs.

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page II-6 12-4-2012 
 
 
e. Emergency Response. Provide emergency response capabilities, as necessary, to 
meet site needs as established by the baseline needs assessment (BNA), safety 
basis requirements, and applicable regulations, codes and standards. 
(1) Baseline Needs Assessment. A BNA of the fire protection and emergency 
response organization must be conducted, and the BNA must: 
(a) establish capabilities to provide: 
1 effective response to extinguish fires; 
2 emergency medical, rescue and hazardous materials 
response; and 
3 staffing, apparatus, facilities, equipment, training, 
pre-incident plans, mutual aid, and procedures. 
(b) reflect applicable requirements of NFPA codes and standards, and 
DOE direction; 
(c) be submitted to the DOE Head of Field Element for approval; 
(d) be reviewed at least every three years, or whenever a significant 
new hazard that is not covered by the current BNA is introduced, 
and be updated as appropriate (Note: If no update is necessary, this 
result must be documented following the review) and submitted to 
the DOE Head of Field Element for approval; and, 
(e) be incorporated into site emergency plans, FHAs, and safety basis 
documentation. 
(2) Pre-Incident Plans. Pre-incident strategies, plans, and standard operating 
procedures must be established to enhance the effectiveness of manual fire 
suppression activities, including areas within or adjacent to, 
moderator-controlled areas. The criticality safety staff must review 
pre-incident plans and procedures related to moderator-controlled areas. 
(3) Manual Fire Suppression Activities. 
(a) Physical access and appropriate equipment that is accessible for 
effective manual firefighting intervention must be provided. 
(b) Procedures governing the use of fire-fighting water or other 
neutron moderating materials to suppress fire within, or adjacent 
to, moderation controlled areas must be established and reviewed 
by a criticality subject matter expert prior to release.

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page II-7 
 
 
(c) Procedures governing firefighting techniques to be used during 
deactivation, decontamination, and demolition phases must be 
established, when applicable. 
(d) Where no alternative exists to criticality safety restrictions on the 
use of water for fire suppression, the need for such restrictions 
must be fully documented with written technical justification. 
f. Fire Hazard Analyses and Facility Assessments. 
(1) Fire Hazards Analyses. FHAs, using a graded approach, must be 
conducted for the following cases:  
(a) all hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities and major 
modifications thereto; 
(b) facilities that represent unique fire safety risks; 
(c) new facilities or modifications to existing facilities with value 
greater than $177 million (in 2018 dollars); and  
(d) when directed by the responsible DOE authority. The FHAs must 
be: 
1 performed under the direction of an FPE; 
2 reviewed every three years by an FPE and revised as 
appropriate (Note: If no revision is necessary, this result 
must be documented following the review); 
3 revised when− 
a changes to the facility structure or layout, 
processes, occupancy, safety basis documentation, 
or BNA impacts the analysis in the FHA; 
b a modification to an associated facility or process 
adds a significant new fire safety risk; or, 
c the periodic (three-year) review identifies the need 
for changes; and 
d integrated into safety basis documentation. 
(2) Facility Assessments. Fire protection assessments must be conducted: 
(e) annually, or at a frequency with appropriate justification approved 
by the DOE Head of Field Element, for facilities with a

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page II-8 12-4-2012 
 
 
replacement value in excess of $118 million (in 2018 dollars), 
facilities considered a high hazard, or those in which vital 
programs are involved, as defined by the responsible DOE 
authority; and, 
(f) at least every three years, or at a frequency with appropriate 
justification approved by the DOE Head of Field Element, for 
remaining low and ordinary hazard facilities. 
g. Wildland Fire. An integrated site-wide wildland fire management plan, consistent 
with the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, must be developed, provided 
to DOE Head of Field Element for approval, and implemented in accordance with 
the relevant portions of the NFPA 1143, Standard for Wildland Fire 
Management.

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page III-1 
 
 
CHAPTER III. NUCLEAR CRITICALITY SAFETY 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for developing and implementing nuclear 
criticality safety programs (CSPs) for nuclear facilities and activities, including materials 
transportation activities, which provide adequate protection to the public, workers, and 
the environment. 
2. APPLICABILITY. This chapter is applicable to DOE elements and DOE contractors 
with responsibility for nuclear facilities and activities that involve or will potentially 
involve radionuclides in such quantities that are equal to or greater than the single 
parameter limits for fissionable materials listed in ANSI/ANS-8.1-2014, Nuclear 
Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors, and 
ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety Control of Selected Actinide Nuclides. 
These limits must be adjusted where process conditions could credibly involve 
moderators or reflectors that are more effective than light water. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. A CSP document must be developed and maintained that describes how the 
contractor will implement the requirements in this chapter, including the 
standards invoked by this chapter. 
b. The CSP document must describe how the contractor will satisfy the requirements 
of the ANSI/ANS-8 series of nuclear criticality safety standards that are in effect 
as of the date this Order, unless otherwise modified and approved by the DOE 
Head of Field Element. The CSP document must include an explanation as to 
why any recommendation in applicable ANSI/ANS-8 standards is not 
implemented. 
c. The CSP document must be submitted to and approved by the DOE Head of Field 
Element. 
d. Criticality safety evaluations must be conducted in accordance with 
DOE-STD-3007-2017, Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities, or by other documented methods approved by the 
DOE Head of Field Element. 
e. Fissile Material Accumulation Control. Facilities that conduct operations using 
fissionable material in a form that could inadvertently accumulate in significant 
quantities must include procedures for detecting and characterizing 
accumulations. The following national standards provide relevant guidance for 
procedure development: ASTM C1455-14e1, Standard Test Method for 
Nondestructive Assay of Special Nuclear Material Holdup Using Gamma-Ray 
Spectroscopic Methods, and any other nondestructive assay consensus or DOE 
standards applicable to the measurement technique selected.

--- page 30 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page III-2 12-4-2012 
 
 
f. Criticality safety evaluations must show that entire processes involving 
fissionable materials will remain subcritical under normal and credible abnormal 
conditions, including those initiated by design basis events. 
g. The criteria and process for developing the guidelines for firefighting in areas 
within or adjacent to moderator-controlled areas must be coordinated with 
firefighting pre-incident plans and procedures.

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page IV-1 
 
 
CHAPTER IV. NATURAL PHENOMENA HAZARDS MITIGATION 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for DOE facility design, construction, and 
operations to protect the public, workers, and the environment from the impact of natural 
phenomena hazards (NPH) events (e.g., earthquake, wind, flood, lightning, snow, and 
volcanic eruption). 
2. APPLICABILITY. Requirements in this chapter apply to all government-owned and 
government-leased nuclear and nonnuclear facilities and sites. Design requirements 
(Sections 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c, below) apply to new facilities, major modifications, and 
modifications that may be warranted based on periodic NPH assessment and upgrade 
requirements. For leased facilities that are not nuclear hazard category 1, 2, or 3 
facilities, the requirements of this chapter apply to the extent determined by the DOE 
Head of Field Element. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General. Facilities must be designed, constructed, maintained, and operated to 
ensure that SSCs will be able to perform their intended safety functions 
effectively under the combined effects of NPH and normal loads defined in the 
applicable building codes contained in facilities’ CORs. Nuclear facility safety 
functions that the SSCs must perform during and after an NPH event must be 
defined in the facility’s safety basis documentation. Safety functions include: 
(1) confinement/containment of hazardous materials; 
(2) protection of occupants and co-located workers of the facility and the 
public; 
(3) continued operation of essential facilities and equipment; 
(4) safe shutdown of hazardous facilities and equipment; and 
(5) maintenance of personnel access to areas needed for responding to 
accidents during NPH events. 
b. NPH Design Criteria. The design of new facilities and major modifications must 
be developed in accordance with the applicable requirements and criteria 
contained in DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and 
Design Criteria for DOE Facilities. (Note: Requirements for non-nuclear 
facilities are described in Section 2.2 of DOE-STD-1020-2016.) 
c. NPH Accident Analysis. The NPH analysis supporting design and construction of 
facilities and safety SSCs must be documented and include evaluation of: 
(1) potential damage to and failure of safety SSCs resulting from both direct 
and indirect NPH events; and,

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page IV-2 12-4-2012 
 
 
(2) common cause/effect and interactions resulting from failures of other 
nearby facilities or other SSCs in the same facility caused by or induced 
by an NPH event. 
d. Review and Upgrade Requirements for Existing DOE Nuclear Facilities (Hazard 
Category 1, 2 and 3). 
(1) Existing facility or site NPH assessments must be reviewed at least once 
every ten years and whenever significant changes in NPH data, criteria, 
and assessment methods warrant updating the assessments. Section 9.2 of 
DOE-STD-1020-2016 contains criteria and guidance for performing these 
reviews. The review results, along with any recommended update actions, 
must be submitted to the DOE Head of Field Element for approval. If no 
update is necessary, this result must be documented following the review. 
(2) If a new assessment of NPH indicates deficiencies in existing SSC design, 
a plan for upgrades must be developed and implemented on a prioritized 
schedule, based on the safety significance of the upgrades, time or funding 
constraints, and mission requirements. The upgrade plans must also be 
submitted to the DOE Head of Field Element for approval. Sections 9.3 
and 9.4 of DOE-STD-1020-2016 contain guidance on performing upgrade 
evaluations. 
e. Seismic Detection. DOE sites with nuclear or hazardous materials must have 
instrumentation or other means to detect and record the occurrence and severity of 
seismic events. 
f. Post-Natural Phenomena Procedures. Facilities or sites with hazardous materials 
must have procedures for inspecting facilities for damage from severe NPH 
events and placing a facility into a safe configuration when damage has occurred.

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page V-1 
 
 
CHAPTER V. COGNIZANT SYSTEM ENGINEER PROGRAM 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for a cognizant system engineer (CSE) program 
for hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities and to ensure continued operational 
readiness of the systems within its scope. 
A key element of the CSE program is the designation of CSEs who are responsible for 
maintaining overall cognizance of assigned systems; providing systems engineering 
support for operations and maintenance; and technical support of line management safety 
responsibilities for ensuring continued system operational readiness. 
2. APPLICABILITY. Requirements of this chapter apply to all hazard category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities that have attained operational status (such as achieving Critical 
Decision 4 (CD-4) per DOE O 413.3B, Chg. 5, Program and Project Management for 
the Acquisition of Capital Assets) and have: 
a. active safety class or safety significant SSCs, as defined in the facility’s 
DOE-approved safety basis documentation; or 
b. other active systems that perform important defense-in-depth functions, as 
designated by facility line management. 
Note: This chapter does not apply to passive systems or design features. Facility 
management should consider establishing CSE programs before CD-4 to ensure their 
stability and operation at CD-4. CSE programs should remain in place as long as the 
covered systems are credited in the safety basis or designated by facility line 
management. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General. The protocols for implementing the site or facility CSE program must be 
documented, must include the functions, responsibilities, and authorities of CSEs, 
and must address the following elements: 
(1) Identification of systems covered by the CSE program and identification 
of systems assigned for coverage; 
(2) Configuration management; 
(3) Support for operations and maintenance; and 
(4) Training and qualifications of CSEs. 
b. CSE Program Coverage. 
(1) The CSE program must be applied to active safety class and safety 
significant systems, as defined in the facility’s DOE-approved safety

--- page 34 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page V-2 12-4-2012 
 
 
basis, as well as to other active systems that perform important 
defense-in-depth functions, as designated by facility line management. 
The designated systems and the rationale for assignment of CSEs in a 
graded approach (see below) must be documented. 
(2) A graded approach must be used in applying the requirements of the CSE 
program. The program must be tailored to facility hazards and the systems 
relied upon to prevent or mitigate those hazards, considering: 
(a) Remaining Facility Lifetime and the Safety Significance of 
Remaining Operations. Facilities undergoing deactivation or 
decontamination/decommissioning may undergo frequent changes, 
modifications, or removal of systems no longer needed to support 
the safety basis of those operations. CSE programs may require 
more CSE attention in these operations than during normal 
operations. After deactivation, or when a facility is in long-term 
surveillance and maintenance, there may be less need for CSE 
attention. 
(b) Safety Importance of the System. Not all systems are equal as 
measured by the likelihood and consequences of the hazard and the 
accidents that they prevent or mitigate. The level of system 
documentation detail in configuration management should be 
tailored to the importance of the system. 
(3) A qualified CSE must be assigned to each active system within the scope 
of the program. Consistent with the graded approach, large, complex, or 
very important systems may require assignment of more than one CSE. 
Conversely, a single individual may be assigned to be the CSE for more 
than one system. 
c. Configuration Management. 
(1) A documented configuration management program must be established 
and implemented that ensures consistency among system requirements and 
performance criteria, system documentation, and physical configuration of 
the systems within the scope of the program. DOE-STD-1073-2016, 
Configuration Management, describes an acceptable methodology for 
establishing configuration management programs. The configuration 
management program must address:  
(a) system design documentation; 
(b) system assessments; 
(c) control of maintenance;

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 2 
12-4-2012  Page V-3 
 
 
(d) change control; and 
(e) aging degradation and technical obsolescence. 
(2) System design documents and supporting documents must be identified 
and kept current using formal change control and work control processes. 
DOE-STD-3024-2011, Content of System Design Descriptions, describes 
an acceptable methodology to achieve this function. Design 
documentation must include: 
(a) system requirements and performance criteria essential to 
performance of the system’s safety functions; 
(b) the basis for system requirements; and 
(c) a description of how the current system configuration satisfies the 
requirements and performance criteria. 
(3) System assessments must include periodic reviews of system operability, 
reliability, and material condition. Reviews must assess the system for:  
(a) the ability to perform design and safety functions; 
(b) physical configuration as compared to system documentation; and 
(c) system and component performance in comparison to established 
performance criteria. 
(4) System maintenance and repair and modification must be controlled 
through a formal change control process to ensure that changes are not 
inadvertently introduced and that required system performance is not 
compromised. Post maintenance or modification testing must be 
conducted to confirm continued capability to fulfill system requirements. 
d. CSE Support for Operations and Maintenance. The CSE must: 
(1) ensure that system configuration is being managed effectively (see Section 
3.c. of this Chapter); 
(2) remain apprised of operational status and ongoing modification activities; 
(3) assist operations review of key system parameters and evaluate system 
performance; 
(4) initiate actions to correct problems; 
(5) remain cognizant of system-specific maintenance and operations history 
and industry operating experience, as well as manufacturer and vendor

--- page 36 ---
Attachment 2  DOE O 420.1C 
Page V-4 12-4-2012 
 
 
recommendations and any product warnings regarding their assigned 
systems; 
(6) identify trends from operations and maintenance; 
(7) provide assistance in determining operability, correcting 
out-of-specification conditions, and evaluating questionable data; 
(8) provide or support analysis when the system is suspected of inoperability 
or degradation; 
(9) review and concur with design changes, use-as-is, equivalency, and 
commercial grade dedication determinations; and 
(10) review, and provide input into the development of, and concur on 
operating, maintenance, and test procedures related to their assigned 
systems. 
e. CSE Qualification Requirements. Qualification requirements for CSEs must be 
consistent with those defined for Technical Support personnel in DOE O 426.2, 
Admin. Chg. 1, Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification 
Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities (see associated CRD), as applicable. 
Qualification requirements must include knowledge of: 
(1) related facility safety bases including safety system functions, safety 
system performance criteria, and any relationship to SACs; 
(2) system functional classification and bases; 
(3) codes and standards applicable to assigned systems; 
(4) system design, procurement, replacement, and related quality assurance 
requirements; 
(5) the existing condition of the systems; 
(6) related facility operations; and 
(7) vendor manuals, product warnings, and updates related to assigned 
systems, available (in print or online).

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 3 
12-4-2012  Page 1 
 
 
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
SAFETY STRUCTURES, SYSTEMS, AND COMPONENTS 
This attachment provides requirements for the design and construction of safety structures, 
systems, and components (SSCs). 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish requirements for the design and construction of safety SSCs, 
both safety class and safety significant, by identifying an applicable set of industry codes 
and standards, as well as Department of Energy (DOE) design criteria, standards, and 
directives. Compliance with these requirements will ensure reliable performance of the 
safety function of safety SSCs under those conditions and events for which they are 
intended. 
2. APPLICABILITY. 
a. This attachment applies to the design and construction of: 
(1) new hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities as defined by 10 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management; and 
(2) major modifications to hazard category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as 
defined in 10 CFR Part 830, that substantially change the facility safety 
basis. 
b. This attachment does not impose requirements on existing facilities, except for 
major modifications to those facilities. The requirements of this attachment may 
be used to develop comparisons of existing facilities to the requirements for new 
facilities. 
c. This attachment does not apply to nuclear deactivation or decontamination and 
decommissioning activities at end-of-facility-life, if the safety analysis 
demonstrates that adequate protection is provided consistent with the 
requirements of 10 CFR Part 830 through alternate means and it is not 
cost-beneficial to apply the provisions of this attachment for the limited 
remaining life of the activity. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. Safety SSCs must be designed, commensurate with the importance 
of the safety functions performed, to perform their safety functions when called upon, as 
determined by the safety analysis.  
a. General Design Criteria. 
(1) Conservative Design Margin. Safety SSCs must be designed with 
appropriate margins of safety, as defined in applicable DOE or industry 
codes and standards.

--- page 38 ---
Attachment 3  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 2  12-4-2012 
 
 
(2) System Reliability. 
(a) The single failure criterion, requirements, and design analysis 
identified in Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) 379-2014, IEEE Standard for Application of the 
Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating Station 
Safety Systems, must be applied to safety class SSCs during the 
design process as the primary method of achieving reliability, 
unless another applicable standard is approved by DOE in 
accordance with the process for obtaining DOE review and 
approval of the applicability of codes and standards as described in 
DOE-Standard (STD)-1189-2016. ANSI/ANS 58.9-2002 (R2015), 
Single Failure Criteria for LWR Safety-Related Fluid Systems, 
may be used in defining the scope of active safety class mechanical 
SSCs. 
(b) Safety significant SSCs must be designed to reliably perform all 
their safety functions. This can be achieved through a number of 
means, including use of redundant systems/components, increased 
testing frequency, high reliability components, and diagnostic 
coverage (e.g., on-line testing; monitoring of component and 
system performance; and monitoring of various failure modes). 
DOE-STD-1195-2011, Design of Safety Significant Safety 
Instrumented Systems Used at DOE Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities, 
provides an acceptable method for achieving high reliability of 
safety significant safety instrumented systems. 
(2) Environmental Qualification. 
(a) Safety class SSCs must be designed to perform all safety functions 
with no failure mechanism that could lead to common cause 
failures under postulated service conditions. The requirements of 
IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E 
Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, must be used 
to ensure environmental qualifications of safety class SSCs, unless 
another applicable standard is approved by DOE in accordance 
with the process for obtaining DOE review and approval of the 
applicability of codes and standards as described in 
DOE-STD-1189-2016. 
(b) Safety significant SSCs located in a harsh environment must be 
evaluated to establish qualified life. This may be accomplished 
using manufacturers’ recommendations or other appropriate 
methods. 
(3) Safe Failure Modes. The facility design must provide reliable safe 
conditions and sufficient confinement of hazardous material during and

--- page 39 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 3 
12-4-2012  Page 3 
 
 
after all design basis accidents (DBAs). At both the facility- and 
SSC-level, the design must ensure that most probable modes of failure 
(e.g., failure to open versus failure to close) will increase the likelihood of 
a safe condition. 
(4) Support System and Interface Design. 
(a) Support SSCs must be designed as safety class or safety significant 
SSCs if their failures prevent safety SSCs or specific 
administrative controls (SACs) from performing their safety 
functions. 
(a) Interfaces—such as pressure retention boundaries, electrical 
supply, instrumentation, cooling water, and other support 
systems—may exist between safety SSCs and non-safety SSCs. 
These interfaces must be evaluated to identify SSC failures that 
would prevent safety SSCs from performing their intended safety 
function. IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria for 
Independence of Class IE Equipment and Circuits, must be used 
for physical and electrical separation methods, including the use of 
separation distance, barriers, electrical isolation devices, or any 
combination thereof, unless another applicable standard is 
approved by DOE in accordance with the process for obtaining 
DOE review and approval of the applicability of codes and 
standards as described in DOE-STD-1189-2016. This application 
includes a design to ensure that both direct and indirect impacts of 
DBAs (e.g., fire, seismic) will not cause failure of safety functions. 
(5) Protection Against Fire. Safety class systems must be designed with 
redundancy or other means, such that safety function is maintained for any 
postulated fire events that credit the safety class systems. 
(6) Quality Assurance. A quality assurance program must be established that 
satisfies 10 CFR Part 830, Subpart A, “Quality Assurance Requirements,” 
and DOE Order (O) 414.1D, Admin. Chg. 1, Quality Assurance, early in 
the project, such that safety SSCs and their associated support systems are 
designed, procured, fabricated, erected, and tested to standards and quality 
requirements commensurate with their importance to safety. 
b. Specific Design Criteria and Use of National Codes and Standards. The selection 
and use of an appropriate set of applicable codes and standards establishes design 
criteria to provide assurance that the SSCs are designed to reliably perform their 
intended functions. The DOE technical standards and industry codes and 
standards identified below, which are widely used for nuclear facility design and 
construction, must be evaluated for applicability.

--- page 40 ---
Attachment 3  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 4  12-4-2012 
 
 
DOE technical standards and industry codes and standards are considered 
applicable when they provide relevant design requirements for the safety SSCs 
that are being designed (i.e., they provide design requirements that are needed to 
ensure that desired SSC functions are achieved, and these requirements are 
appropriate for the design materials, configuration, and service conditions). 
Further, the use of specific codes and standards may be directed by the DOE Head 
of Field Element. (Note: The stated applicability of industry codes and standards 
(e.g., for nuclear reactors) should not be used to narrowly interpret relevancy for 
SSC design.) 
Before using these codes and standards, their application to specific DOE 
design(s) must be reviewed. Once a code or standard is identified as applicable, 
the applicable requirements (i.e., mandatory statements) must be applied in the 
design. The process for obtaining DOE review and approval of the applicability of 
codes and standards is described in DOE-STD-1189-2016. 
The Safety Design Strategy developed in accordance with DOE-STD-1189-2016 
may be used to specify provisions for relief (exemptions and equivalencies) from 
identified, applicable design and construction codes and standards. If the Safety 
Design Strategy is not used to specify relief provisions, the process for obtaining 
relief (i.e., equivalencies or exemptions) from applicable requirements in 
applicable DOE technical standards and industry codes and standards is described 
in Attachment 1 of DOE O 420.1C. (Note: Relief is not necessary for 
requirements within an applicable industry code or standard where the 
requirements are not relevant to the design or construction. Relief from Order 
420.1C requirements, including requirements to follow invoked standards, would 
still be required to follow Attachment 1, Section 2.a, unless the requirements 
specifically relate to satisfying DOE technical standards and industry codes and 
standards that have been identified as applicable.) 
The set of codes and standards identified below is not meant to be all-inclusive. It 
is expected that design of SSCs will require selection of additional codes and 
standards beyond those identified below. For example, unique design features, 
detailed design considerations, and release of advancements may drive selection 
of additional codes and standards. Facility designers must identify the complete 
set of codes and standards necessary to meet the general design criteria identified 
above (see also Attachment 4 of DOE O 420.1C for additional codes and 
standards). 
(1) Structural. Table 1 provides relevant codes and standards. Attachment 2, 
Chapter IV of DOE O 420.1C provides additional natural phenomena 
hazards (NPH) design requirements.

--- page 41 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 3 
12-4-2012  Page 5 
 
 
Table 1: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Structures 
Structures  Safety Significant  Safety Class  
Concrete  
ACI-318; 
ACI-349 
  
ACI-349  
Steel  
ANSI/AISC 360; 
AISC 325; 
ANSI/AISC N690  
ANSI/AISC N690  
 
Note: See DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis 
and Design Criteria for DOE Facilities, for further discussion on 
selection and use of codes for structural design of SSCs. 
(2) Mechanical and Process Equipment. Table 2 provides relevant codes and 
standards. 
Table 2: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Process Equipment 
Process 
Equipment  Safety Significant  Safety Class  
Pressure vessels  ASME BPVC, Section VIII, Division 1 
or 2  
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, Division 1 or 
2  
Tanks (0-15 
psig)  
API-620; 
ASME BPVC Section VIII, Division 1 
or 2  
API-620; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, Division 1 or 
2  
Tanks 
(containing 
flammable 
liquids)  
API-620; 
API-650; 
Applicable NFPA codes and standards  
API-620; 
API-650; 
Applicable NFPA codes and standards  
Tanks 
(atmospheric 
pressure)  
API-650; 
AWWA D100  
API-650; 
AWWA D100  
Pumps  
ASME B73.1, B73.2; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII; 
AWWA D100; 
Hydraulic Institute Standards, as 
applicable  
ASME B73.1, B73.2; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII; 
AWWA D100; 
Hydraulic Institute Standards, as 
applicable  
Piping  ASME B31.3  ASME B31.3  
Valves  
ASME B16.5; 
B31.3; 
ANSI N278.1  
ASME B16.5; 
B31.3; 
ANSI N278.1  
Heat 
Exchangers  
ASHRAE Handbook; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, Division 1; 
TEMA B, C, or R  
ASHRAE Handbook; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, Division 1; 
TEMA B, C, or R  
Gloveboxes  ASTM C852; AGS-G006  ASTM C852; AGS-G006

--- page 42 ---
Attachment 3  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 6  12-4-2012 
 
 
(3) Ventilation. Table 3 provides relevant codes and standards.  
Appendix A of DOE Guide (G) 420.1-1A, Nonreactor Nuclear Safety 
Design Criteria for use with DOE O 420.1C, Facility Safety, and 
DOE-HDBK-1169-2003, Nuclear Air Cleaning Handbook, provide 
guidance for confinement ventilation systems design and performance 
criteria. Alternate methods must be approved by DOE Heads of Field 
Element. 
Table 3: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Ventilation System Components 
Ventilation  Safety Significant  Safety Class  
Ducts  ASME AG-1  ASME AG-1  
Fans  ASHRAE Handbook; ASME 
AG-1  
ASHRAE Handbook; ASME 
AG-1  
Filtration  ASME AG-1; 
DOE-STD-3020-2015  
ASME AG-1; 
DOE-STD-3020-2015  
Balance of system for 
confinement ventilation  ASME AG-1  ASME AG-1  
Off-gas treatment  ASME AG-1  ASME AG-1  
 
(4) Mechanical Handling Equipment. Table 4 provides relevant codes and 
standards. 
Table 4: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Handling Equipment  
Handling 
Equipment  Safety Significant  Safety Class  
Cranes  
Applicable CMAA standards; 
ASME NOG-1; 
ASME NUM-1; 
ASME B30.2; 
DOE-STD-1090-2011  
Applicable CMAA standards; 
ASME NOG-1; 
ASME NUM-1; 
ASME B30.2; 
DOE-STD-1090-2011  
Other equipment  ASME B30 Series: 
DOE-STD-1090-2011  
ASME B30 Series; DOE-STD-1090-2011  
 
(5) Electrical. Tables 5 and 6 provide relevant codes and standards. 
Note: ANSI/IEEE standards, below, define requirements for the 
manufacturing, installation, and testing of commercial reactor 
Safety-Class 1E electrical systems and components. While these 
requirements may not be directly applicable to nonreactor nuclear 
facilities, these standards contain useful and significant information that 
should be considered.

--- page 43 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 3 
12-4-2012  Page 7 
 
 
Table 5: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Electrical Systems 
Electrical  Safety Significant  Safety Class  
Hardware  
Applicable NFPA codes and standards; 
IES HB-10; 
IEEE C2, C37; 
IEEE-80, -141, -142, -242, -399, -446 
493, -577  
Applicable NFPA codes and standards; 
IES HB-10; 
IEEE C2, C37; 
IEEE-80, -141, -142, -242, -308, -338, -379 
, -384, -399, -493, -577  
 
Table 6: IEEE Standards used for Both Safety Significant  
and Safety Class Electrical Systems, as appropriate 
Electrical  Safety Significant and Safety Class  
Guidance standards for use as applicable for specific 
hardware  
IEEE-323, -334, -336, -344, -352 -382, -383, -387, 
-420, -450, -484, -493, -535, -603, -627, -628, -649 
, -650, -833, -946  
 
(6) Instrumentation, Control, and Alarm Systems. The design of safety class 
instrumentation and control systems must incorporate sufficient 
independence, redundancy, diversity, and separation to ensure that all 
safety-related functions associated with such equipment can be performed. 
Safety significant components must be evaluated as to the need for 
redundancy on a case-by-case basis. DOE-STD-1195-2011 provides an 
acceptable method for achieving high reliability of safety significant 
safety instrumented systems. 
Table 7 provides relevant codes and standards. The codes and standards 
for electrical systems (in Tables 5 and 6) may also be applicable to design 
of instrumentation and control systems and need to be evaluated in this 
context. 
Table 7: Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Instrumentation, 
Control, and Alarm Components.  
Instruments, 
Controls, and Alarms Safety Significant Safety Class 
Hardware  
Applicable NFPA codes and 
standards; 
ANSI/ANS-8.3, 
-58.8, 
-N13.1, 
-N323D; 
ANSI/ISA-Series including ISA 
67.04.01 and ISA TR 84.00.06; 
IEEE-C2, 
-N42.18, 
-1023,  
Applicable NFPA codes and standards; 
ANSI/ANS-8.3, 
58.8, 
-N13.1, 
ANSI-N323D; 
ANSI/ISA-Series including ISA 67.04.01 
and ISA TR 84.00.06; 
IEEE-C2, 
-N42.18, 
-603,

--- page 44 ---
Attachment 3  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 8  12-4-2012 
 
 
Instruments, 
Controls, and 
Alarms  
Safety Significant  
 
Safety Class  
 -1050; 
-7-4.3.2; and 
DOE-STD-1195-2011  
-1023, -1050, 
-7-4.3.2  
 
 
(7) Fire Protection Systems. DOE-STD-1066-2016, Fire Protection, provides 
acceptable methods for the design of fire protection systems. Design 
requirements for safety class and safety significant fire barriers, water 
supplies, and wet pipe sprinkler systems are provided in Appendix A of 
DOE-STD-1066-2016. Fire protection system designs are also required to 
address the applicable design requirements for similar safety systems 
provided in this attachment. 
c. Nuclear Reactor Safety Design Criteria. Nuclear reactors are an important class of 
DOE facilities that require special attention to design criteria and standards to 
ensure safe design and operations. 
(1) The Code of Record for existing DOE nuclear reactors has been 
established by their designs. When a major modification is made to an 
existing reactor, the existing Code of Record is the starting point for the 
design of the major modification, and a design upgrade analysis is 
required in accordance with DOE-STD-1189-2016 to evaluate the 
application of nuclear safety design criteria and requirements. This design 
upgrade analysis may identify updated nuclear reactor safety design 
criteria and updated codes and standards to be applied to the major 
modification. 
(2) For any new DOE nuclear reactor, a set of reactor-specific safety design 
criteria and a set of reactor design codes and standards must be established 
in accordance with the Safety Design Strategy required by 
DOE-STD-1189-2016. Existing industry codes and standards should be 
used to the extent possible.

--- page 45 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 1 
 
 
REFERENCES AND ACRONYMS 
1. REFERENCES. The following reference documents and information sources are cited to 
assist in implementing this Order. This attachment does not provide a complete listing of 
industry codes and standards that may be needed.  
a. Public Law (Pub. L.). 
(1) Pub. L. 83-703, Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
(2) Pub. L. 94-580, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 
(RCRA), as amended. 
(3) Pub. L. 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, 
as amended. 
b. Executive Orders (E.O.) and Federal Policies. 
(1) E.O. 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 02-01-1982. 
(2) Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, National Interagency Fire 
Center, 1995 (R 2001). 
(3) Secretarial Delegation Order Number 00-033.00C, 08-12-2016. 
c. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). 
(1) 10 CFR Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management. 
(2) 10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection. 
(3) 10 CFR Part 851, Worker Safety and Health Program. 
(4) 29 CFR Part 1910, Occupational Safety and Health Standards. 
(5) 29 CFR Part 1926, Safety and Health Regulations for Construction. 
(6) 48 CFR Part 970, Section 970.5223-1, “Integration of Environment, 
Safety, and Health into Work Planning and Execution.” 
d. DOE Directives. 
(1) DOE P 420.1, Department of Energy Nuclear Safety Policy, 02-08-11. 
(2) DOE O 151.1D, Comprehensive Emergency Management System, 
8-11-16.

--- page 46 ---
Attachment 4  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 2  12-4-2012 
 
 
(3) DOE O 226.1B, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight 
Policy, 04-25-11. 
(4) DOE O 227.1A, Independent Oversight Program, 12-21-15. 
(5) DOE O 251.1D, Departmental Directives Program, 01-17-17. 
(6) DOE O 410.1, Central Technical Authority Responsibilities Regarding 
Nuclear Safety Requirements, 08-28-07. 
(7) DOE O 413.3B Chg. 5, Program and Project Management for the 
Acquisition of Capital Assets, 04-12-18. 
(8) DOE O 414.1D, Admin. Chg. 1, Quality Assurance, 05-08-13. 
(9) DOE O 420.2C, Safety of Accelerator Facilities, 07-21-11. 
(10) DOE O 426.2 Admin. Chg. 1, Personnel Selection, Training, 
Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities, 
07-29-13. 
(11) DOE O 433.1B Chg. 1, Maintenance Management Program for DOE 
Nuclear Facilities, 03-12-13. 
(12) DOE O 435.1 Chg. 1, Radioactive Waste Management, 01-09-07. 
(13) DOE O 450.2, Integrated Safety Management, 04-25-11. 
(14) DOE O 452.1E, Nuclear Explosive and Weapon Surety Program, 
01-26-15. 
(15) DOE O 452.2E, Nuclear Explosive Safety, 01-26-15. 
(16) DOE M 435.1-1 Chg. 2, Radioactive Waste Management Manual, 
06-08-11. 
(17) DOE G 413.3-21 Chg. 1, Cost Estimating Guide, 10-22-15. 
(18) DOE G 414.1-2B Chg. 2, Quality Assurance Program Guide, 05-08-13. 
(19) DOE G 414.1-4, Safety Software Guide for use with 10 C.F.R 830 Subpart 
A, Quality Assurance Requirements, and DOE O 414.1C, Quality 
Assurance, 11-03-10. 
(20) DOE G 420.1-1A, Nonreactor Nuclear Safety Design Criteria for Use 
with DOE O 420.1C, Facility Safety, 12-04-12.

--- page 47 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 3 
 
 
e. DOE Technical Standards (STDs). 
(1) DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design 
Criteria for DOE Facilities. 
(2) DOE-STD-1027-1992, Chg. 1, Hazard Categorization and Accident 
Analysis Techniques for Compliance with DOE Order 5480.23, Nuclear 
Safety Analysis Reports, September 1997. 
(3) DOE-STD-1066-2016, Fire Protection. 
(4) DOE-STD-1073-2016, Configuration Management. 
(5) DOE-STD-1090-2011, Hoisting and Rigging. (Formerly Hoisting and 
Rigging Manual). 
(6) DOE-STD-1098-2008, Radiological Control. 
(7) DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety 
Basis and Safety Design Basis Documents. 
(8) DOE-STD-1128-2013, Guide of Good Practices for Occupational 
Radiological Protection in Plutonium Facilities. 
(9) DOE-STD-1158-2010, Self-Assessment Standard for DOE Contractor 
Criticality Safety Programs. 
(10) DOE-STD-1186-2016, Specific Administrative Controls. 
(11) DOE-STD-1189-2016, Integration of Safety into the Design Process. 
(12) DOE-STD-1195-2011, Design of Safety Significant Safety Instrumented 
Systems Used at DOE Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities. 
(13) DOE-STD-1212-2012, Explosives Safety. 
(14) DOE-STD-1628-2013, Development of Probabilistic Risk Assessments for 
Nuclear Safety Applications. 
(15) DOE-STD-3007-2017, Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities. 
(16) DOE-STD-3009-94, Preparation Guide for U.S. Department of Energy 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety Analyses, Chg. Notice 3, 
March 2006. 
(17) DOE-STD-3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility 
Documented Safety Analysis.

--- page 48 ---
Attachment 4  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 4  12-4-2012 
 
 
(18) DOE-STD-3020-2015, Specifications for HEPA Filters Used by DOE 
Contractors. 
(19) DOE-STD-3024-2011, Content of System Design Descriptions. 
f. DOE Handbooks (HDBKs). 
(1) DOE-HDBK-1132-1999, Design Considerations. 
(2) DOE-HDBK-1163-2003, Integration of Multiple Hazard Analysis 
Requirements and Activities. 
(3) DOE-HDBK-1169-2003, Nuclear Air Cleaning Handbook. 
g. Department of Defense. 
MIL-STD-1472F, Department of Defense Design Criteria Standard: Human 
Engineering, August 1999. 
h. American Concrete Institute (ACI). 
ACI 349-06, Code Requirements for Nuclear Safety-Related Concrete Structures 
(ACI 349-06) and Commentary, 2006. 
e. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 
ACGIH 2096, Industrial Ventilation: A Manual of Recommended Practices for 
Design, January 2010. 
f. American Glovebox Society (AGS). 
AGS-G006-2005, Standard of Practice for the Design and Fabrication of Nuclear 
Application Gloveboxes, 2005. 
i. American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(1) ANSI N13.1-2011, Guide to Sampling and Monitoring Releases of 
Airborne Radioactive Substances from the Stacks and Ducts of Nuclear 
Facilities, 2011. 
(2) ANSI N43.2-2001 (R2010), Radiation Safety for X-ray Diffraction and 
Fluorescence Analysis Equipment, 2001. 
(3) ANSI N278.1-1975 (R1992), Self-Operated and Power-Operated 
Safety-Related Valves Functional Specification Standard, 1975. 
(4) ANSI N323D-2002, American National Standard for Installed Radiation 
Protection Instrumentation, 2002.

--- page 49 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 5 
 
 
(5) ANSI/AIHA Z9.2-2012, Fundamentals Governing the Design and 
Operation of Local Exhaust Ventilation Systems, 2012. 
(6) ANSI Z358.1-2009, American National Standard for Emergency Eyewash 
and Shower Equipment, 2009. 
j. American National Standards Institute/American Institute of Steel Construction 
(AISC). 
(1) AISC 325:2011, Steel Construction Manual, 2011. 
(2) ANSI/AISC 360:10, Specification for Structural Steel Buildings, 2010. 
(3) ANSI/AISC N690-12, Specification for Safety-Related Steel Structures for 
Nuclear Facilities, 2012. 
k. American National Standards Institute/American Nuclear Society (ANS). 
(1) ANSI/ANS-1-2000 (R2007) (R2012), Conduct of Critical Experiments, 
2000. 
(2) ANSI/ANS-6.4.2-2006, Specification for Radiation Shielding Materials, 
2006. 
(3) ANSI/ANS-8 Series Standards. 
(4) ANSI/ANS-8.1-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with 
Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors, 2014. 
(5) ANSI/ANS-8.3-1997 (R2003) (R2012), Criticality Accident Alarm 
System, 1997. 
(6) ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety Control of Selected 
Actinide Nuclides, 2014. 
(7) ANSI/ANS-14.1-2004 (R2009) (R2014), Operation of Fast Pulse 
Reactors, 2004. 
(8) ANSI/ANS-58.8-1994 (R2001) (R2008), Time Response Design Criteria 
for Safety-Related Operator Actions, 1994. 
(9) ANSI/ANS-58.9-2002 (R2015), Single Failure Criteria for LWR 
Safety-Related Fluid Systems, 1981. 
l. American National Standards Institute/International Society of Automation (ISA). 
(1) ANSI/ISA 7.0.01-1996, Quality Standard for Instrument Air, 1996.

--- page 50 ---
Attachment 4  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 6  12-4-2012 
 
 
(2) ANSI/ISA 18.1-1979 (R2004), Annunciator Sequences and Specifications, 
1979. 
(3) ANSI/ISA 67.01.01-2002 (R2007), Transducer and Transmitter 
Installation for Nuclear Safety Applications, 2002. 
(4) ANSI/ISA S67.02.01-1999, Nuclear-Safety-Related Instrument Sensing 
Line Piping and Tubing Standard for Use in Nuclear Power Plants, 1999. 
(5) ANSI/ISA 67.04.01-2006 (R2011), Setpoints for Nuclear Safety-Related 
Instrumentation, 2006. 
m. American Petroleum Institute (API). 
(1) API-620, Design and Construction of Large, Welded, Low-Pressure 
Storage Tanks, 2013. 
(2) API-650, Welded Tanks for Oil Storage, 2013. 
n. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE). 
(1) ASHRAE Handbook, Fundamentals (Inch-Pound Edition), 2013. 
(2) ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2010, Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air 
Quality, 2010. 
o. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
(1) ASME AG-1-2015, Code on Nuclear Air and Gas Treatment, 2015. 
(2) ASME BPVC, Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 2015. 
(3) ASME B16.5-2013, Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: NPS ½ through 
NPS 24 Metric/Inch Standard, 2013. 
(4) ASME B30.2-2011, Overhead and Gantry Cranes (Top Running Bridge, 
Single or Multiple Girder, Top Running Trolley Hoist), 2011. 
(5) ASME B31.3-2014, Process Piping, 2014. 
(6) ASME B73.1-2012, Specification for Horizontal End Suction Centrifugal 
Pumps for Chemical Process, 2012. 
(7) ASME B73.2-2003 (R2009), Specifications for Vertical In-Line 
Centrifugal Pumps for Chemical Process, 2003.

--- page 51 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 7 
 
 
(8) ASME NOG-1-2010, Rules for Construction of Overhead and Gantry 
Cranes (Top Running Bridge, Multiple Girder), 2010. 
(9) ASME NUM-1-2009, Rules for Construction of Cranes, Monorails, and 
Hoists (with Bridge or Trolley or Hoist of the Underhung Type), 2009. 
(10) ASME NQA-1-2012, Quality Assurance Requirements for Nuclear 
Facility Applications, 2013. 
p. ASTM International. 
(1) ASTM C852-09, Standard Guide for Design Criteria for Plutonium 
Gloveboxes, 2009. 
(2) ASTM C1455-14e1, Standard Test Method for Nondestructive Assay of 
Special Nuclear Material Holdup Using Gamma-Ray Spectroscopic 
Methods, 2014. 
g. American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
AWWA D100-11, Welded Carbon Steel Tanks for Water Storage, 2011. 
h. Crane Manufacturers Association of America (CMAA). 
CMAA Standards, as applicable. 
i. Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (DNFSB). 
DNFSB Recommendation 2004-2, Active Confinement Systems. 
j. Hydraulic Institute Standards. 
Hydraulic Institute Standards, as applicable. 
k. Illuminating Engineering Society (IES). 
IES HB-10-11, IES Lighting Handbook, 2011. 
l. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)/International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 
(3) IEEE C2-2017, National Electrical Safety Code, 2017. 
(4) IEEE C37 Standards Collection, Power Switchgears, Substations, and 
Relays, Standards on switchgear as applicable, 2010.

--- page 52 ---
Attachment 4  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 8  12-4-2012 
 
 
(5) IEEE N42.18-2004, American National Standard Specification and 
Performance of On-Site Instrumentation for Continuously Monitoring 
Radioactivity in Effluents, 2004. 
(6) IEEE N323D-2002, American National Standard to Installed Radiation 
Protection Instrumentation, 2003. 
(7) IEEE 7-4.3.2-2016, IEEE Standard Criteria for Programmable Digital 
Devices in Safety Systems of Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2016. 
(8) IEEE 80-2013, IEEE Guide for Safety in AC Substation Grounding, 2013. 
(9) IEEE 141-1993 (R1999), IEEE Recommended Practice for Electric Power 
Distribution for Industrial Plants, 1993. 
(10) IEEE 142-2007, IEEE Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial 
and Commercial Power Systems, 2007. 
(11) IEEE 242-2001, IEEE Recommended Practice for Protection and 
Coordination of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems (IEEE Buff 
Book), 2001. 
(12) IEEE 308-2012, IEEE Standard Criteria for Class 1E Power Systems for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2012. 
(13) IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E 
Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2003. 
(14) IEEE 334-2006 (R2012), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Continuous Duty 
Class 1E Motors for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
(15) IEEE 336-2010, IEEE Recommended Practice for Installation, Inspection, 
and Testing for Class 1E Power, Instrumentation, and Control Equipment 
at Nuclear Facilities, 2010. 
(16) IEEE 338-2012, IEEE Standard for Criteria for the Periodic Surveillance 
Testing of Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety, 2012. 
(17) IEEE 344-2013, IEEE Standard for Seismic Qualification of Equipment 
for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2013. 
(18) IEEE 352-1987, IEEE Guide for General Principles of Reliability Analysis 
of Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety Systems, 1987. 
(19) IEEE 379-2014, IEEE Standard for Application of the Single-Failure 
Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety Systems, 2014.

--- page 53 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 9 
 
 
(20) IEEE 382-2006, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Safety-Related 
Actuators for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
(21) IEEE 383-2015, IEEE Standard for Qualifying Electric Cables and 
Splices for Nuclear Facilities, 2015. 
(22) IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria for Independence of Class 1E 
Equipment and Circuits, 2008. 
(23) IEEE 387-1995 (R2007), IEEE Standard Criteria for Diesel Generator 
Units Applied as Standby Power Supplies for Nuclear Power Generation 
Stations, 1995. 
(24) IEEE 399-1997, IEEE Recommended Practice for Industrial and 
Commercial Power Systems Analysis (IEEE Brown Book), 1997. 
(25) IEEE 420-2013, IEEE Standard for the Design and Qualification of Class 
1E Control Boards, Panels, and Racks Used in Nuclear Power Generating 
Stations, 2013. 
(26) IEEE 446-1995 (R2000), IEEE Recommended Practice for Emergency 
and Standby Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications, 
1995. 
(27) IEEE 450-2010, IEEE Recommended Practice for Maintenance, Testing, 
and Replacement of Vented Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary 
Applications, 2010. 
(28) IEEE 484-2002, IEEE Recommended Practice for Installation Design and 
Installation of Vented Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary Applications, 
2002. 
(29) IEEE 493-2007, IEEE Recommended Practice for the Design of Reliable 
Industrial and Commercial Power Systems, 2007. 
(30) IEEE 535-2013, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Class 1E Vented Lead 
Acid Storage Batteries for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2013. 
(31) IEEE 577-2012, IEEE Standard Requirements for Reliability Analysis in 
the Design and Operation of Safety Systems for Nuclear Power 
Generating Stations, 2012. 
(32) IEEE 603-2009, IEEE Standard Criteria for Safety Systems for Nuclear 
Power Generating Stations, 2009. 
(33) IEEE 627-2010, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Equipment Used in 
Nuclear Facilities, 2010.

--- page 54 ---
Attachment 4  DOE O 420.1C 
Page 10  12-4-2012 
 
 
(34) IEEE 628-2011, IEEE Standard Criteria for the Design, Installation, and 
Qualification of Raceway Systems for Class 1E Circuits for Nuclear 
Power Generating Stations, 2011. 
(35) IEEE 649-2006 (R2011), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Motor 
Control Centers for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
(36) IEEE 650-2006, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Class 1E Static 
Battery Chargers and Inverters for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 
2006. 
(37) IEEE 833-2005 (R2011), IEEE Recommended Practice for the Protection 
of Electric Equipment in Nuclear Power Generating Stations from Water 
Hazards, 2005. 
(38) IEEE 946-2004, IEEE Recommended Practice for the Design of DC 
Auxiliary Power Systems for Generating Systems, 2004. 
(39) IEEE 1023-2004 (R2010), IEEE Recommended Practice for the 
Application of Human Factors Engineering to Systems, Equipment, and 
Facilities of Nuclear Power Generating Stations and other Nuclear 
Facilities, 2004. 
(40) IEEE 1050-2004, IEEE Guide for Instrumentation and Control Equipment 
Grounding in Generating Stations, 2004. 
m. International Code Council (ICC). 
ICC, International Building Code, 2015. 
n. International Society of Automation (ISA). 
ISA-TR84.00.06, Safety Fieldbus Design Considerations for Process Industry 
Sector Applications, 2009. 
o. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP). 
NCRP Report 49, “Structural Shielding Design and Evaluation for Medical Use 
of X Rays and Gamma Rays of Energies Up to 10 MeV,” 1976.  
q. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
(1) NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, 2015. 
(2) NFPA 70, National Electric Code, 2017. 
(3) NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, 2016.

--- page 55 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 11 (and Page 12) 
 
 
(4) NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2015. 
(5) NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems, 2016. 
(6) NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems, 
2017. 
(7) NFPA 1143, Standard for Wildland Fire Management, 2014.  
r. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
NUREG-0700, Human-System Interface Design Review Guidelines, 2002.  
s. Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association (TEMA). 
TEMA, 9th Edition TEMA Standards: Standards on Heat Exchangers Classes B, C, 
and R. Appendix F, Concluding Material. New York, 2007.

--- page 56 ---


--- page 57 ---
DOE O 420.1C  Attachment 4 
12-4-2012  Page 13 (and Page 14) 
 
 
ACRONYMS. 
AHJ  Authority Having Jurisdiction 
ANS  American Nuclear Society 
ANSI  American National Standards Institute 
BNA  Baseline Needs Assessment 
CD  Critical Decision 
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations 
COR  Code of Record 
CRD  Contractor Requirements Document 
CSE  Cognizant System Engineer 
CSP  Criticality Safety Program 
DBA  Design Basis Accident 
DOE  Department of Energy 
DSA  Documented Safety Analysis 
FHA  Fire Hazards Analysis 
FPE  Fire Protection Engineer 
G  Guide 
IBC  International Building Code 
IEEE  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
M  Manual 
MPFL  Maximum Possible Fire Loss 
NFPA  National Fire Protection Association 
NPH  Natural Phenomena Hazards 
O Order 
P Policy 
SAC  Specific Administrative Controls 
SSC  Structures, Systems, and Components 
STD  Standard
