--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov  Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Approved: 5-17-07 
Certified: 6-17-11 
Chg 1 (PgChg): 8-21-12 
Chg 2 (AdminChg): 3-14-13 
Chg 3 (LtdChg): 09-15-20 
Chg 4 (AdminChg): 05-02-22 
SUBJECT: WORKER PROTECTION PROGRAM FOR DOE (INCLUDING THE 
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION) FEDERAL 
EMPLOYEES 
1. OBJECTIVE. To establish the framework for an effective worker protection program that 
will reduce or prevent injuries, illnesses, and accidental losses by providing Department 
of Energy (DOE), including National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), Federal 
workers with a safe and healthful workplace. 
2. CA NCELLATION. DOE O 440.1B, Worker Protection Program for DOE (Including the 
National Nuclear Security Administration) Federal Employees, dated 09-15-20. 
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor requirements documents (CRDs) that 
have been incorporated into or attached to a contract remain in effect until the contract is 
modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or substitute a new 
set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY.  
a. Departmental Elements. Except for the exclusions in paragraph 3c, this Order 
(including Attachment 1) applies to Departmental elements. (Go to 
http://www.directives.doe.gov/references). This list automatically includes all 
Departmental elements created after the Order is issued. 
The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) will 
assure that NNSA employees comply with their respective responsibilities under 
this Order. Nothing in this Order will be construed to interfere with the NNSA 
Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to 
establish Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary 
b. Contractors. None.  
c. Exclusions. 
(1) Activities conducted under the authority of the Director, Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Program, as described in P.L. 98-525. 
(2) Activities conducted under the Nuclear Explosives and Weapons Safety 
Program relating to the prevention of accidental or unauthorized nuclear 
detonations to the extent a requirement under this Order cannot be  
DOE O 440.1B

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 440.1B 
 5-17-07 
 
 
implemented for a particular facility in a manner that does not compromise 
the effectiveness of such activities. 
(3) Activities conducted by Bonneville Power Administration as authorized by 
Delegation Order No. 00–033.00A.  
4. REQUIREMENTS. DOE elements must: 
a. Establish and implement a written worker protection program appropriate for the 
facility hazards that: 
(1) Provides a place of employment free from recognized hazards that are causing 
or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to their employees; and, 
(2) Integrates all requirements contained in paragraphs 4a through 4m of this 
Order; program requirements contained in Title 29 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 1960, Basic Program Elements for Federal Employee 
Occupational Safety and Health Programs and Related Matters; applicable 
functional area requirements contained in Attachment 1; and other related site-
specific worker protection activities. 
b. Establish written policy, goals, and objectives for the worker protection program. 
c. Use qualified worker protection staff to direct and manage the worker protection 
program. 
d. Assign worker protection responsibilities, evaluate personnel performance, and 
hold personnel accountable for worker protection performance. 
e. Encourage the involvement of employees in the development of program goals, 
objectives, and performance measures and in the identification and control of 
hazards in the workplace. 
f. Provide workers the right, without reprisal, to: 
(1) Accompany DOE worker protection personnel during workplace 
inspections; 
(2) Participate in activities provided for in this Order on official time;  
(3) Express concerns related to worker protection; 
(4) Decline to perform an assigned task because of a reasonable belief that, 
under the circumstances, the task poses an imminent risk of death or 
serious bodily harm to that individual, coupled with a reasonable belief 
that there is insufficient time to seek effective redress through the normal 
hazard reporting and abatement procedures established in accordance with 
this Order;

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 440.1B 3 
5-17-07 
 
 
(5) Have access to DOE worker protection publications, DOE-prescribed 
standards, and the organization's own worker protection standards or 
procedures applicable to the workplace; 
(6) Observe monitoring or measuring of hazardous agents and have access to the 
results of exposure monitoring; 
(7) Be notified when monitoring results indicate they were overexposed to 
hazardous materials; 
(8) Receive results of inspections and accident investigations upon request; 
(9) Have limited information on any recordkeeping log (OSHA Form 300). 
Access is subject to Freedom of Information Act requirements and 
restrictions; and 
(10) Review the DOE Form 5484.3 (the DOE equivalent to OSHA Form 301) that 
contains the employee’s name as the injured or ill worker. 
g. Implement procedures to allow workers to stop work when they discover 
employee exposures to imminent danger conditions or other serious hazards. The 
procedure must ensure that any stop work authority is exercised in a justifiable 
and responsible manner. 
h. Inform workers of their rights and responsibilities by appropriate means, 
including posting the Occupational Safety and Health Protection for DOE 
Employees Poster in the workplace where it is accessible to all workers. 
i. Identify existing and potential workplace hazards and evaluate the risk of 
associated worker injury or illness. 
(1) Analyze or review: 
(a) Designs for new facilities and modifications to existing facilities 
and equipment; 
(b) Operations and procedures; and 
(c) Equipment, product, and service needs. 
(2) Perform routine job activity-level hazard analyses, if appropriate for the 
particular work environment or task. 
(3) Assess worker exposure to chemical, physical, biological, or ergonomic 
hazards through appropriate workplace monitoring (including personal, area, 
wipe, and bulk sampling), biological monitoring, and observation. Monitoring 
results must be recorded. Documentation must describe the tasks and locations 
where monitoring occurred, identify workers monitored or represented by the

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 440.1B 
 5-17-07 
 
 
monitoring, and identify the sampling methods and durations, control 
measures in place during monitoring (including the use of personal protective 
equipment), and any other factors that may have affected sampling results. 
(4) Evaluate workplaces and activities accomplished routinely by workers, 
supervisors, and managers and periodically by qualified worker protection 
professionals. 
(5) Report and investigate accidents, incidents, injuries, illnesses and analyze 
related data for trends and lessons learned. Requirements for accident, injury, 
and illness reporting and investigation and trending and lessons-learned are 
contained in DOE O 231.1, current version, and DOE O 225.1, current 
version. 
(6) Review site safety and health experience information. 
(7) Consider interactions between workplace hazards and other hazards such as 
radiological hazards, as appropriate. 
j. Implement a hazard prevention/abatement process to ensure that all identified 
hazards are managed through final abatement or control. 
(1) For hazards identified either in the facility design or during the development 
of procedures, controls must be incorporated in the appropriate facility design 
or procedure. 
(2) For existing hazards identified in the workplace, abatement actions prioritized 
according to risk to the worker must be promptly implemented, interim 
protective measures must be implemented pending final abatement, and 
workers must be protected immediately from imminent danger conditions. 
(3) Hazards must be addressed when selecting or purchasing equipment, 
products, and services. 
(4) Hazard control methods must be selected based on the following hierarchy: 
(a) Substitution and/or elimination.  
(b) Engineering controls. 
(c) Work practices and administrative controls that limit worker 
exposures. 
(d) Personal protective equipment. 
k. Provide workers, supervisors, managers, visitors, and worker protection 
professionals with worker protection training. (Also see Attachment 1, 
paragraph 10)

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 440.1B 5 
5-17-07 
 
 
l. Develop and implement occupant emergency plans and procedures, conduct 
training, and emergency drills according to directives and guidance issued by 
DOE. 
m. Comply with the following worker protection requirements that are applicable to 
the hazards at the facility: 
(1) Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 1910, Occupational Safety 
and Health Standards; 
(2) Title 29 CFR 1915, Occupational Safety and Health Standards for Shipyard 
Employment; 
(3) Title 29 CFR 1917, Marine Terminals; 
(4) Title 29 CFR Part 1918, Safety and Health Regulations for Longshoring;  
(5) Title 29 CFR Part 1926 Safety and Health Regulations for Construction;  
(6) Title 29 CFR Part 1928, Occupational Safety and Health Standards for 
Agriculture; 
(7) Title 29 CFR Sections 1904.4 through 1904.11, 1904.29 through 1904.33, 
1904.44 and 1904.46, Recording and Reporting Occupational Injuries and 
Illnesses; 
(8) Title 10 CFR Part 850, Chronic Beryllium Disease Prevention Program; 
(9) American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienist (ACGIH), 
Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and 
Biological Exposure Indices, when the ACGIH Threshold Limit Values 
(TLVs) are lower (more protective) than permissible exposure limits in 
29 CFR Part 1910. When the ACGIH TLVs are used as exposure limits, 
federal employees must nonetheless comply with the other provisions of any 
applicable expanded health standard found in 29 CFR Part 1910. DOE 
Elements must use ACGIH limits for physical hazards not covered by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); 
(10) American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z88.2, American National 
Standard Practices for Respiratory Protection, (for respiratory protection 
issues not covered by 29 CFR 1910.134); 
(11) ANSI Z136.1, Safe Use of Lasers, (for laser hazards not covered by OSHA 
standards); 
(12) ANSI Z49.1, Safety in Welding, Cutting and Allied Processes, Sections 4.3 
and E4.3 of the 1999 edition or equivalent sections of subsequent editions, (for 
welding hazards not covered by OSHA standards);

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 440.1B 
 5-17-07 
 
 
(13) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70, National Electrical 
Code; 
(14) NFPA 70E, Standards for Electrical Safety in the Workplace; 
(15) 42 CFR Part 73, Select Agents and Toxins; 
(16) 9 CFR Part 121, Possession, Use and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins; 
and 
(17) 7 CFR Part 331, Possession, Use and Transfer of Select Agents and 
Toxins. 
n. Nothing in this document must be construed as relieving a federal facility from 
complying with any additional specific safety and health requirement that it 
determines to be necessary to protect the safety and health of workers. 
o. Additional requirements for applicable functional areas are contained in 
Attachment 1, Functional Area Requirements. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Assistant Secretaries (and NNSA Deputy Administrators where applicable). 
(1) Ensure that program-specific worker protection goals and objectives are 
developed and resources are provided. 
(2) Ensure that worker protection policies and requirements are effectively 
implemented. 
(3) Develop or participate in recognition programs that encourage the 
improvement of worker protection programs. 
(4) When contractors report directly to the Cognizant Secretarial Officer or an 
Assistant Secretary, ensure that the requirements of paragraph 5b (and 
applicable responsibilities in the specific functional areas contained in 
Attachment 1) and the requirements of 10 CFR 851 are implemented. 
(5) Assist in the resolution of significant worker protection issues and the 
improvement in cost effectiveness and efficiency of worker protection 
programs. 
(6) Review and be the approving authority for exemptions to requirements 
contained in this Order. Approval authority for exemptions to the 
requirements in this Order may be delegated (except for those exemptions 
related to OSHA standards.)

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 440.1B 7 
5-17-07 
 
 
(7) Incorporate performance elements for Federal Employee Occupational 
Safety and Health (FEOSH) Program into management performance 
elements. 
b. Heads of Departmental Elements and Heads of Field Elements. 
(1) Ensure through the Contracting Officer that contractors implement the 
requirements of 10 CFR 851. 
(2) Review contractor worker protection program budgets and provide 
recommendations to the funding official on the appropriateness of the budget 
request. 
(3) Provide contractors with technical direction on and criteria for the 
development of contractor goals, objectives, and performance measures. 
(4) Hold DOE line personnel accountable for providing technical direction to 
contractors that is consistent with the requirements contained in 10 CFR 851. 
(5) Evaluate the need for and direct the development of formal written 
agreements between Departmental elements on their sites. These agreements 
must outline the respective roles, responsibilities, and authorities of each 
Departmental element as they relate to compliance with DOE worker 
protection requirements and the resolution of cross-cutting worker protection-
related issues. 
(6) Revi ew  and forward, to the Director, Office of Environment, Health, Safety 
and Security all exemptions, exceptions, and variances to mandatory worker 
protection requirements contained in this Order. Conduct an annual review of 
the status of all exemptions to the requirements contained in this Order to 
ensure that circumstances requiring the need for relief have not changed and 
that instituted controls are still implemented and appropriate. 
(7) Provide annually to the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
input for the Department of Labor’s FEOSH report, including status of 
progress in meeting established goals, new initiatives, and other requested 
information. 
(8) Establish annually FEOSH Program goals and objectives for both promoting 
the program and for reducing accidents, injuries, and lost-time cases. 
c. Operations Office Managers (and Heads of Field Elements, where applicable). 
(1) Ensure that unannounced worker protection inspections of federal workplaces 
are conducted at least annually. 
(2) Ensure immediate and effective remedial actions are taken for imminent 
danger situations discovered during worker protection inspections to ensure

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 440.1B 
 5-17-07 
 
 
employees are removed from the hazard or the hazard is eliminated; conduct 
an inspection as soon as possible after an imminent danger situation has been 
corrected to ascertain that appropriate actions have been taken to preclude 
recurrence. 
(3) Ensure that initiators of procurement requests specify therein whether 
requirements in 10 CFR 851 are to be applied to the resulting awards or 
subawards. 
(4) Ensure that a FEOSH Program Manager/Coordinator is assigned the 
responsibility for administration of the FEOSH Program and is provided 
adequate training commensurate with that responsibility. 
d.  Director, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security . 
(1) Establish committees as necessary to assist in the development of 
Departmental requirements and guidance. 
(2) Review and recommend for approval any exemptions contained in this Order 
in accordance with DOE O 251.1, current version. 
e. Contracting Officers. Require contractors to comply with the requirements of 
10 CFR 851. 
6. I NVOKED TECHNICAL STANDARDS . The following DOE technical standards and 
industry standards are invoked as required methods in this Order in accordance with the 
applicability and conditions described within this Order. Any technical standard or 
industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by this Order, but is not included in 
the list below, is not invoked by this Order. Note: DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J provides a 
definition for “invoked technical standard.” 
a. DOE-STD-1167-2003, The Department of Energy Respiratory Acceptance 
Program for Supplied-Air Suits, is required to be used for testing of respiratory 
equipment when National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health-
approved respiratory protection does not exist for DOE tasks that require such 
equipment. See Attachment 1, Section 5.b.(11) for specific requirements. 
b. DOE-STD-1212-2012, Explosive Safety, is required to be met for applicable 
explosive safety operations. See Attachment 1, Section 4 for specific 
requirements. 
c. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z49.1, Safety in Welding, 
Cutting and Allied Processes, Sections 4.3 and E4.3 of the 2012 edition, is 
required to be used for worker protection requirements that are applicable to the 
hazards at the facility (for welding hazards not covered by OSHA standards). 
See Section 4.m. for specific requirements. Heads of Departmental Elements 
may authorize the use of equivalent sections of a later edition of this Standard 
to fulfill the requirements in this Order.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 440.1B 9 (and 10) 
5-17-07 
 
 
d. ANSI Z88.2, American National Standard Practices for Respiratory 
Protection, is required to be used for worker protection requirements that are 
applicable to the hazards at the facility. See Section 4.m. for specific 
requirements.  
e. ANSI Z136.1, Safe Use of Lasers, is required to be used for worker protection 
requirements that are applicable to the hazards at the facility (for laser hazards 
not covered by OSHA standards). See Section 4.m for specific requirements.  
f. ANSI/American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) B.31, Piping Code, 
is required to be used for pressure vessels, boilers, air receivers, and supporting 
piping systems. See Attachment 1, Section 7.b. for specific requirements.  
g. National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors (NBBI) NB23, 
National Board Inspection Code, is required to be used for pressure vessels, 
boilers, air receivers, and supporting piping systems. See Attachment 1, Section 
7.b. for specific requirements.  
h. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70, National Electrical Code, and 
NFPA 70E, Standards for Electrical Safety in the Workplace, are required to be 
used for worker protection requirements that are applicable to the hazards at the 
facility. See Section 4.m. for specific requirements.  
7. CONTACT. For technical interpretations of DOE-prescribed worker protection 
standards, consult the DOE Technical Information Services database, or submit a question 
to the DOE Policy Clarification (PC) Portal at https://www.energy.gov/ehss/safety-a nd-
health-policy-clarification-portal. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 MARK W. MENEZES  
 Deputy Secretary

--- page 10 ---


--- page 11 ---
DOE O 440.1B Attachment 1 
5-17-07 Page 1 
 
 
FUNCTIONAL AREA REQUIREMENTS 
This attachment establishes the mandatory requirements for implementing the applicable 
functional areas required by paragraph 4.o. of this Order. 
1. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY. The following requirements and responsibilities apply for 
construction projects above the monetary threshold established by the Davis-Bacon Act 
(40 U.S.C. 276a) at Government-owned or -leased facilities where the contract clause 
"Safety and Health (Government-Owned or -Leased Facility)" applies: 
a. Hea ds of Departmental Elements, and Heads of Field Elements.  
(1) Designate a project manager for each construction project. 
(2) Ensure that project managers are provided with the training, resources, and 
technical support necessary to perform the duties prescribed by this Order. 
(3) Develop formal written agreements/implementing instructions as needed to 
delineate the respective construction safety responsibilities/duties of DOE 
project management and technical support staffs. 
(4) Review safety and health programs developed for site maintenance and 
operational activities to determine their applicability and cost effectiveness on 
construction projects. 
(5) Direct the development and implementation of a system for evaluating the 
effectiveness of construction contractor safety and health programs on fixed-
price construction projects and apply this system to the determination of 
bidder responsibility on future construction projects. (Refer to Federal 
Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 36.201.) 
(6) En su re that applicable requirements of this Order are specified within 
construction project acquisition documents. 
b. Construction Project Managers. 
(1) Determine the necessity for requiring dedicated construction contractor safety 
and health personnel on project workplaces. 
(2) Ensure that construction project acquisition documents provide information or 
reference to existing documentation that describes known hazards to which 
project workers may be exposed. 
(3) Ensure that a pre-work safety meeting is conducted with the construction 
contractor to review project safety and health requirements.

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 440.1B 
Page 2 5-17-07 
 
 
(4) Ensure that the project safety and health plan is approved prior to any on- site 
project work and that required hazard analyses are completed and approved 
prior to start of work on affected construction operations. 
(5) Ensure that project safety and health plans and hazard analyses are revised, as 
necessary, to address identified deficiencies in project safety and health 
performance or changes in project operations, contractors, or personnel. 
(6) Through personal on-site involvement and/or formal delegation to support 
staff and/or the construction manager, perform frequent and regular 
documented on-site reviews of construction contractor safety and health 
program effectiveness. 
(7) Ensure documentation exists for all formal contract actions taken to enforce 
construction contractor compliance with project safety and health 
requirements. 
2. FIRE PROTECTION. Establish and implement a comprehensive fire protection program 
with the objective of providing an acceptable level of safety from fire and related hazards 
for DOE and NNSA Federal personnel and for the public. This includes appropriate 
facility and site-wide protection (refer to DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version), 
fire alarm notification and egress features, and access to a fully staffed, trained, and 
equipped fire department that is capable of responding in a timely and effective manner to 
site occurrences. 
a. An acceptable fire protection program includes those fire protection criteria and 
procedures, analyses, hardware and systems, apparatus and equipment, and 
personnel that comprehensively ensure that the above objective is met. This 
includes meeting applicable building codes and National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards or exceeding them (when necessary to 
meet safety objectives), unless explicit written relief has been granted. 
b. Life Safety Code. NFPA Standard 101, Life Safety Code, is applicable to most 
DOE facilities. DOE Elements with Federal worker responsibility may determine 
that NFPA 101A, Alternate Approaches to Life Safety, can be applied to DOE 
facilities where an equivalent level of life safety to NFPA 101 is needed provided 
that such an alternative approach is determined by a qualified individual. DOE 
Elements with Federal worker responsibility also should determine the additional 
or modified exit requirements needed for toxic and explosive environments if 
appropriate. The exit requirements for explosives environments should reflect the 
criteria contained in the DOE–STD-1212, Explosives Safety (available by 
searching at http://www.hss.doe.gov/nuclearsafety/ns/techstds/standard.html). 
Additional fire protection features and personnel limits should be maintained 
where noncompliance with some NFPA Standard 101 provisions are necessary to 
prevent creating serious hazards, e.g. as could occur in some containment 
structures.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 440.1B Attachment 1 
5-17-07 Page 3 
 
 
c. Fire Watches. When applicable, fire watcher requirements in NFPA 51B should 
be expanded to include responsibility for the safety of the welder(s) in addition to 
that of the facility. 
3. FIRE ARMS SAFETY. 
a. Establish firearms safety policies and procedures for security operations and 
training to ensure proper accident prevention controls are in place. Written 
procedures must address firearms safety, engineering and administrative controls, 
as well as personal protective equipment requirements. At a minimum, procedures 
must be established for: 
(1) Storage, handling, cleaning, inventory and maintenance of firearms and 
associated ammunition; 
(2) Activities such as loading, unloading, and exchanging firearms. These 
procedures must address use of bullet containment devices and those 
techniques to be used when no bullet containment device is available; 
(3) Use and storage of pyrotechnics, explosives, and/or explosive projectiles; 
(4) Handling misfires, duds, and unauthorized discharges; 
(5) Live fire training, qualification, and evaluation activities; 
(6) Training  and exercises using engagement simulation systems;  
(7) Training and exercises using obscurant-generating devices; 
(8) Emergency responses at firearms training facilities; and, 
(9) Use of firing ranges by personnel other than DOE or DOE contractor 
protective forces personnel. 
b. Ensure that personnel responsible for the direction and operation of the firearms 
safety program are professionally qualified and have sufficient time and authority 
to implement the established program. 
c. Ensure that firearms instructors and armorers have been certified by the 
Safeguards and Security National Training Center. Personnel must be 
professionally qualified through DOE National Training Center, military, or 
factory training to conduct the level of activity they provide. 
d. C onduc t formal appraisals assessing implementation of procedures, personnel 
responsibilities, and duty assignments to ensure overall policy objectives. 
e. Implement provisions related to firearms training, live fire range safety, 
qualification, and evaluation activities.

--- page 14 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 440.1B 
Page 4 5-17-07 
 
 
f. Personnel must successfully complete and demonstrate understanding of initial 
firearms safety training before being issued any firearms. Authorization to remain 
in armed status will continue only if the employee demonstrates the technical and 
practical knowledge of firearms safety semi-annually. 
g. Personnel authorized to carry firearms must have access to instruction manuals or 
materials for each type of firearm with which they are armed while on duty. 
h. Authorized armed personnel must demonstrate both technical and practical 
knowledge of firearms handling and safety on a semi-annual basis. This 
demonstration must be supported by limited scope performance tests, and the 
results of such testing must be documented. 
i. All firearms training lesson plans must incorporate safety for all aspects of 
firearms training task performance standards. Lesson plans must follow the 
standards and criteria set forth by the Safeguards and Security Central Training 
Academy's standard training program. 
j. Firearms safety briefings must immediately precede training, qualifications, and 
evaluation activities involving live fire and/or engagement simulation systems. 
k. A safety an alysis approved by DOE line management must be developed for the 
facilities and operation of each live fire range. A safety analysis must be 
completed and approved prior to implementation of any new training, 
qualification, or evaluation activity. Results of these analyses must be 
incorporated into procedures, lesson plans, exercise plans, and limited scope 
performance tests. 
l. Firing range safety procedures must be conspicuously posted at all primary range 
facilities. 
m. Live fire ranges must be properly sited to protect personnel on the range, as well 
as personnel and property not associated with the range. Approval for the location 
and use of live fire range must be obtained from the DOE field element manager. 
n. Develop a safety or risk analysis for all facilities or areas in which firearms will be 
introduced in accordance with the local protection strategy. Such analyses must be 
approved by DOE line management. 
o. En su re that the transportation, handling, placarding, and storage of munitions 
conform to the applicable requirements of DOE-STD-1212, DOE Explosives 
Safety. 
4. EXPLOSIVES SAFETY. Ensure that applicable explosives operations comply with 
DOE-STD-1212, DOE Explosives Safety. Facility management must determine the 
applicability of the requirements to research and development laboratory type operations 
consistent with the DOE level of protection criteria in the technical standard. The

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 440.1B Attachment 1 
5-17-07 Page 5 
 
 
administration and management of DOE-STD-1212, DOE Explosives Safety and any 
deviations from it, must follow the process specified in Chapter I of the technical 
standard. Revisions to the technical standard are made through established Technical 
Standards revision process. 
5. INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE. 
a. Implement a comprehensive and effective industrial hygiene program to reduce 
the risk of work-related disease or illness. 
b. Include the following elements in industrial hygiene programs: 
(1) Initial or baseline surveys of all work areas or operations to identify and 
evaluate potential worker health risks. 
(2) Coordination with planning and design personnel to anticipate and control 
health hazards that proposed facilities and operations would introduce. 
(3) Coordination with cognizant occupational medical, environmental, health 
physics, and work planning professionals. 
(4) Policies and procedures to mitigate the risk from identified and potential 
occupational carcinogens. 
(5) Professionally and technically qualified industrial hygienists to manage and 
implement the industrial hygiene program. 
(6) Periodic resurveys and/or exposure monitoring as appropriate. 
(7) Docum ented exposure assessment for chemical, physical and biological 
agents and ergonomic stressors using recognized exposure assessment 
methodologies and use of accredited industrial hygiene laboratories. 
(8) Specification of appropriate engineering, administrative, work practice, and/or 
personal protective control methods to limit hazardous exposures to 
acceptable levels. 
(9) Worker education, training, and involvement.  
(10) Use of appropriate industrial hygiene standards. 
(11) Use of respiratory protection equipment tested under the DOE Respiratory 
Acceptance Program for Supplied-air Suits (DOE Technical Standard 
1167-2003) when National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health- 
approved respiratory protection does not exist for DOE tasks that require such 
equipment. For security operations conducted in accordance with Presidential 
Decision Directive 39, U. S. Policy on Counter Terrorism, use of Department

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 440.1B 
Page 6 5-17-07 
 
 
of Defense military type masks for respiratory protection by security is 
acceptable. 
6. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY. 
a. Implement and manage a program that confirms handling, transfer, use, and 
receipt of etiologic agents are conducted by professionally and technically 
qualified individuals in a manner consistent with the potential hazard. 
b. C onfir m that each DOE contractor performing work with etiologic agents 
establishes an Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) or equivalent, which will 
be responsible for recommending approval and reviewing proposals and programs 
for compliance with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), Department of 
Agriculture, National Institutes of Health (NIH), World Health Organization 
(WHO), and other international, Federal, State, and local regulations or guidelines 
for work with etiologic agents. This review should include assessment of 
containment level, facilities, procedures, practices, and training and expertise of 
personnel. In addition, this committee should review the site's security, 
safeguards, and emergency management plans and procedures to ensure that they 
adequately address work with etiologic agents. DOE staff, with the requisite 
technical expertise and training, should be in cluded as a member of the facility 
IBC (or equivalent). 
c. Be aware of  each CDC registration certificate issued to a DOE facility registered 
and approved to transfer, receive, and handle select agents at Biosafety Level 
(BSL) 2, 3, or 4 under their cognizance. The field elements must also be aware of 
each CDC Form EA-101, Transfer of Select Agents, for each select agent received 
or transferred by a registered facility under their cognizance. 
d. Maintain a record of the status of etiologic agents at facilities under their 
authority, based on annual reports from contractors. 
7. PRESSURE SAFETY. DOE Elements must implement a comprehensive pressure vessel 
and pressure system safety program. This program must meet, at a minimum, the 
following criteria: 
a. Establish written and documented safety policies and procedures to ensure that all 
pressure vessels and systems are designed, fabricated, tested, procured, inspected, 
maintained, repaired, and operated by trained and qualified personnel in 
accordance with applicable and sound engineering principles. 
b. All pressure vessels, boilers, air receivers, and supporting piping systems must 
conform to the following applicable code or standard in place at time of 
installation or significant modification: 
(1) American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Design and Construction 
of Boiler, Air Receivers, and Pressure Vessels;

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 440.1B Attachment 1 
5-17-07 Page 7 
 
 
(2) American National Standards Institute/ASME B.31 Piping Code;  
(3) National Board Inspection Code NB-23; 
(4) Department of Transportation, 49 CFR Parts 100-199; and/or 
(5) Strictest applicable state and local codes. 
c. If national consensus codes are not applicable (because of pressure range, vessel 
geometry, use of special materials, etc.), implementing measures must be 
established to provide equivalent protection and ensure safety equal to or superior 
to the intent of the ASME code. Measures must meet the following criteria: 
(1) Design drawings, sketches, and calculations must be reviewed and approved 
by an independent design professional. Documented organizational peer 
review is acceptable. 
(2) Qualified personnel must be used to perform examinations and inspections 
of materials, in-process fabrications, non-destructive tests, and acceptance 
tests. 
(3) Documentation, traceability, and accountability must be maintained for each 
pressure vessel or system, including descriptions of design, pressure, testing, 
operation, repair, and maintenance. 
d. Each pressure vessel or system, including the design, pressure ratings, traceability, 
inspection, testing, operations, repair, and maintenance requirements must be 
described and documented. 
e. All components in the pressure system, especially components of pressure relief 
devices and control valves, must be inspected, tested, and maintained as required 
by the above applicable standards. Inspections, testing, and maintenance may be 
done according to competently developed and peer-reviewed engineering and 
maintenance specifications, provided that they ensure safety equal to or superior 
to the intent of any applicable standard. This process must be documented. 
f. Qualified personnel must control the selection and use of the pressure hardware, 
including quality control requirements, procurement specifications, and assembly 
of pressure components. 
g. Personnel who design, build, and operate pressure systems must be trained and 
qualified through documented formal classroom attendance, testing, on-the-job 
experience and/or training. 
h. Worker Involvement/Safety Committee(s) must recommend and/or review safety 
policies; address unusual problems and occurrences; and provide advice and 
assistance in pressure safety.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 440.1B 
Page 8 5-17-07 
 
 
8. MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY. 
a. Implement a Motor Vehicle Safety Program to protect the safety and health of all 
drivers and passengers in Government-owned or -leased motor vehicles and 
powered industrial equipment (i.e., fork, trucks, tractors, platform lift trucks, and 
other similar specialized equipment powered by an electric motor or an internal 
combustion engine).  
b. Tailor the program for the individual DOE site or facility, based on an analysis of 
the needs of that particular site or facility, and it must address the following areas: 
(1) Minimum licensing requirements (including appropriate testing and medical 
qualification) for personnel operating motor vehicles and powered industrial 
equipment. 
(2) Requirements for the use of seat belts and provision of other safety devices. 
(3) Training for specialty vehicle operators. 
(4) Requirements for motor vehicle maintenance and inspection.  
(5) Uniform traffic and pedestrian control devices and road signs.  
(6) On-site speed limits and other traffic rules. 
(7) Awareness campaigns and incentive programs to encourage safe driving.  
(8) Enforcement provisions. 
9. ELECTRICAL SAFETY. DOE Elements must implement a comprehensive electrical 
safety program appropriate for the activities at the facility. The program must meet the 
applicable electrical safety codes and standards referenced in paragraph 4m of this Order. 
10. T RAINI NG AND INFORMATION. 
a. Develop and implement a worker safety and health training and information 
program to ensure that all federal workers exposed or potentially exposed to 
hazards are provided with the training and information on that hazard in order to 
perform their duties in a safe and healthful manner. 
b. Provide the following: 
(1) Training and information for new federal workers, before or at the time of 
initial assignment to a job involving exposure to a hazard;  
(2) Periodic training as often as necessary to ensure that federal workers are 
adequately trained and informed; and

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 440.1B Attachment 1 
5-17-07 Page 9 (and Page 10) 
 
 
(3) Additional training when safety and health information or a change in 
workplace conditions indicates that a new or increased hazard exists.  
c. DOE must provide training and information to federal workers who have worker 
safety and health program responsibilities that is necessary for them to carry out 
those responsibilities. safety and health program responsibilities that is necessary  
11. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING. 
a. Recordkeeping. 
(1) Establish and maintain complete and accurate records of all hazard inventory 
information, hazard assessments, exposure measurements, and exposure 
controls. 
(2) Ensure that the work-related injuries and illnesses of federal workers and 
contractor/subcontractor workers are recorded and reported accurately and 
consistent with DOE O 231.1, Environment, Safety and Health Reporting, 
current version. 
(3) Comply with the applicable occupational injury and illness recordkeeping and 
reporting workplace safety and health standards referenced in paragraph 4m 
of this Order unless otherwise directed in DOE O 231.1, current version. 
(4) Ensure that any information concerning non-compliance or potential 
noncompliance with the requirements in this document is not concealed nor 
destroyed. 
b. Reporting and investigation. 
(1) Report and investigate accidents, injuries and illness (reference DOE O 225.1, 
Accident Investigations, current version; DOE O 231.1, Environment, Safety 
and Health Reporting, current version: and 29 CFR 1960 Subpart I. 
(2) Analyze related data for trends and lessons learned (reference DOE O 225.1, 
Accident Investigations, current version.
