--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  DOE CORPORATE OPERATING EXPERIENCE PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE. 
a. To institute a Department of Energy (DOE)-wide program for the management 
of operating experience to prevent adverse operating incidents and facilitate 
the sharing of good work practices among DOE sites while enabling tailored 
local operating experience programs based on the nature of work, hazards, 
and organizational complexities.  Operating experiences can be found in 
all disciplines. 
b. To provide the systematic review, identification, collection, screening, evaluation, 
and dissemination of operating experience from United States (U.S.) and foreign 
government agencies and industry, professional societies, trade associations, 
national academies, universities, and DOE and its contractors. 
c. To define the DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program so that it can be 
integrated into major management programs, reinforcing the core functions and 
guiding principles of DOE’s Integrated Safety Management System (ISMS), and 
enhance mission accomplishment, quality assurance, safety, and reliability. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 210.2A, DOE Corporate Operating Experience 
Program, dated 04-08-11. 
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive.  Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability.  Except for the exemptions in paragraph 3c, the 
provisions of this Order apply to all Departmental Elements. 
The National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) Administrator shall 
ensure that NNSA employees comply with their respective responsibilities under 
this Order.  Nothing in this directive shall be construed to interfere with the 
NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 
106-65 to establish Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by 
the Secretary. 
DOE O 210.2B

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 210.2B 
 08-05-2026 
b. DOE Contractors.  Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c the 
CRD, Attachment 1, sets forth requirements of this Order that apply to contracts 
that include the CRD.  The CRD must be included in the contracts for the 
operation, management, maintenance, construction, demolition, or remediation of 
a DOE facility. 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions.  Equivalencies and exemptions to this Order are 
processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1C, Departmental Directives Program. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at Title 50 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§  2406 and 2511, Naval 
Nuclear Propulsion Program, and to ensure consistency through the joint 
Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator 
for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements 
and practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director’s 
cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  Consistent with Secretarial Delegation Order 
Number 00033.00B to the Administrator and Chief Executive Officer, 
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA), this Order does not apply 
to BPA. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Departmental Elements, including Headquarters and Field Elements, must 
develop and implement an Operating Experience (OE) Program and identify and 
designate an OE Program Coordinator.  The OE Program shall use a graded 
approach when addressing the applicability of the following requirements and the 
basis for this approach must be documented based upon the review and analysis 
of the hazards and risks for the program and its operational activities. 
b. Each organization must submit lessons learned from operating experience to the 
DOE Corporate Lessons Learned Database when both: 
(1) Operating experience has relevance to other DOE facilities, sites, or 
programs; and 
(2) Information has the potential to help avoid adverse operating incidents, for 
performance improvements, or for cost savings. 
c. The DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program has the following 
requirements: 
(1) A formal process must be established to review and evaluate operating 
experience from DOE and related government or industry programs, 
technologies, and facilities.  This requirement may be satisfied by regular 
participation in the review of external events conducted by the Operating 
Experience Committee (OEC).

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 210.2B  3 
08-05-2026 
(2) Routinely screen and assess internal and external operating experience to 
identify significant issues and lessons learned that may be of safety 
significance or have a bearing on the success of DOE missions and to 
make them available to the DOE complex. 
(3) Operating experience must be centrally collected, stored, and retrievable 
to allow ready access to and communication of collected information on a 
timely, unimpeded basis by all DOE elements. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Deputy Secretary.  Approves Operating Experience Level 1 (OE-1) reports, as 
needed, to inform the DOE complex of the most significant events or trends of 
events in accordance with Appendix A. 
b. NNSA Administrator and Program Secretarial Officers. 
(1) Designate OE Program coordinators to fulfill responsibilities of this Order. 
(2) Develop and promulgate relevant operating experience through the DOE 
Corporate Operating Experience Program, including identified cross-
cutting issues and trends and lessons learned following completion of 
major program missions and contract transitions. 
(3) Ensure appropriate coordination and response for DOE Corporate 
Operating Experience Documents, in accordance with Appendix A. 
(4) Ensure that operating experience is incorporated into applicable activities 
and processes. 
(5) As part of self-assessments conducted to evaluate organizational 
performance in Integrated Safety Management (ISM), include an 
assessment of the effectiveness of the organization’s operating 
experience program. 
c. Office of Health, Safety and Security. 
(1) As the designated DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program Lead 
Office, maintain and continuously improve the program and associated 
databases (e.g., the DOE Corporate Lessons Learned Database). 
(2) Develop, promulgate, and maintain program guidance materials. 
(3) Assist DOE elements in implementing this Order. 
(4) Collect and analyze internal operating experience information (e.g., from 
occurrence reports, accident investigations, and site-specific input) to 
identify and communicate significant-crosscutting issues and trends.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 210.2B 
 08-05-2026 
(5) Collect and analyze external operating experience information (e.g., from 
other government agencies, industry organizations, or professional groups) 
to identify and communicate significant issues and lessons learned 
applicable to DOE. 
(6) Develop and communicate performance trending and analysis information 
from operating experience (e.g., daily occurrence summaries, weekly 
reports, periodic safety management meeting materials, and occurrence 
trend reports). 
(7) Develop and distribute DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program 
documents in accordance with Appendix A. 
(8) Promote and manage the DOE OEC, the members of which perform 
in-depth reviews of DOE and external operating experience to determine 
its relevance and share both internal and external lessons learned. 
(9) Perform annual self-assessment reviews on the effectiveness of the OE 
Program to guide ongoing program improvement. 
d. Heads of Field Elements and Contracting Activities; Heads of GOGO Sites; and 
Heads of Sites Not Under the Cognizance of a DOE Field Element. 
(1) Designate OE Program Coordinators who have access to senior 
management to fulfill the responsibilities assigned by this Order. 
(2) Develop and promulgate relevant operating experience through the 
DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program, including lessons 
learned following completion of major program missions and contract 
transitions, and submit lessons learned to the DOE Corporate Lessons 
Learned Database. 
(3) Ensure appropriate coordination and responses for DOE Corporate 
Operating Experience Documents, in accordance with Appendix A. 
(4) Ensure that operating experience is incorporated into applicable activities 
and processes. 
(5) Identify contracts to which the CRD should apply and notify the cognizant 
contracting officers. 
(6) As part of self-assessments conducted to evaluate organizational 
performance in Integrated Safety Management (ISM), include an 
assessment of the effectiveness of the organization’s operating 
experience program.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 210.2B  5 
08-05-2026 
e. Operating Experience Program Coordinators. 
(1) Serve as the point-of-contact for the DOE Corporate Operating 
Experience Program. 
(2) Support Program, Field Office, or Government Site Managers, as 
requested, in implementing, managing, and overseeing the OE Program. 
(3) Determine, with the help of subject-matter experts, the applicability and 
significance of internal and external operating experiences and distribute 
products, as applicable, for review, analysis, and potential action. 
(4) Apprise senior management of any emergent operating experience issues 
or adverse trends that need management attention. 
(5) Participate in the OEC and OEC activities and tasks. 
f. Contracting Officers.  Incorporate the CRD into contracts in a timely fashion 
upon notification of its applicability. 
6. DEFINITIONS. 
a. Actions.  Responses to lessons learned.  Examples are: 
(1) Corrective actions in response to occurrence analysis. 
(2) Preventive actions to preclude the recurrence of a negative event. 
(3) Improvement actions based on good work practices or 
innovative approaches. 
b. DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program Documents.  Publications defined 
in Appendix A, DOE Corporate Operating Experience Program Documents. 
c. Good Work Practice or Best Practice.  A positive example of work processes 
with the potential to be the basis for significant operational improvements or 
cost savings. 
d. Lesson Learned.  A good work practice or innovative approach that is captured 
and shared to promote repeat application or an adverse work practice or 
experience that is captured and shared to prevent recurrence. 
e. Operating Experience.  Information that relates to the methods by which work is 
planned and conducted and an organization’s missions are performed.  Operating 
experience provides the basis for knowledge and understanding that fosters 
development of lessons learned and improvement of operational performance.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 210.2B 
 08-05-2026 
f. Operating Experience Committee.  A committee that performs in-depth reviews 
of industry operating experience to determine its relevance to DOE and shares 
both internal and external lessons learned. 
g. Subject-Matter Expert (SME).  An individual with qualifications and experience 
in a particular field or work process; an individual who by education, training, 
and/or experience is a recognized expert on a particular subject, topic, or system. 
7. REFERENCES. 
(Note: DOE directives are available online at 
www.directives.doe.gov/directives/current.html.) 
a. Public Law 106-65, section 3212(d), Administrator for Nuclear Security—
Policy Authority 
b. 50 U.S.C. § 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors 
c. 50 U.S.C. § 2511, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program 
d. DOE O 251.1C, Departmental Directives Program 
e. Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program 
8. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this order should be addressed to the Office of 
Health, Safety and Security at EHSSWebTeam@hq.doe.gov. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 210.2B Appendix A—Federal Employees Only 
08-05-2026 Page A-1 
APPENDIX A 
DOE CORPORATE OPERATING EXPERIENCE PROGRAM DOCUMENTS 
Operating 
Experience 
Document Purpose Developed By Distrib. Vehicle Issued By Issued To 
Who Takes 
Action Actions 
Follow-up 
Reports 
Operating 
Experience 
Level 1 
(OE-1) 
To inform DOE complex of most 
significant events or trends of 
concern to DOE management, 
including assessments and 
required actions with close-out 
verification in a formal response. 
Operating Experience 
(OPEX) Lead Office 
and working group of 
subject-matter experts 
(SMEs) from across 
DOE. 
Formal 
Correspondence 
 
Lessons Learned 
(LL) Webpage 
Deputy 
Secretary 
(Dep Sec) 
National Nuclear 
Security 
Administration 
(NNSA) and DOE 
Under Secretaries 
(Under Secs) 
For Action 
Registered persons 
are notified when 
posted on Internet. 
As directed Assessments; 
decision of 
applicability; actions 
taken or planned 
with dates; 
verification of close-
out. 
Formal response 
required through 
Under Secs to 
Dep Sec (copy to 
OPEX Lead 
Office) with 
consolidated 
report of actions 
taken and 
affirmation that 
expectations are 
met or will 
be met by 
required date. 
Operating 
Experience 
Level 2 
(OE-2) 
To inform DOE complex (or 
affected sites) of potentially 
significant safety issues (e.g., 
Conduct of Operations (CON-
OPS); Suspect/Counterfeit or 
Defective items (S/CI-D).  Must 
include a statement of actions 
required (or recommended for 
NNSA) and formal method of 
feedback. 
OPEX Lead Office 
and working group of 
SMEs from across 
DOE 
Formal 
Correspondence 
 
LL Webpage 
Chief, 
Health, 
Safety and 
Security 
Office 
NNSA Principal 
Deputy 
Administrator and 
Program Secretarial 
Offices (PSOs) 
For Action 
Registered persons 
are notified when 
posted on Internet. 
DOE, including 
Government- 
Owned/ 
Government-
Operated 
(GOGO), 
Elements and 
Contractors, as 
applicable 
Review issue 
(e.g., CON-OPS or 
Purchasing for 
S/CI-D) and take 
appropriate action. ___

--- page 8 ---
Appendix A – Federal Employees Only DOE O 210.2B 
Page A-2 08-05-2026 
DOE CORPORATE OPERATING EXPERIENCE PROGRAM DOCUMENTS 
Operating 
Experience 
Document Purpose Developed By Distrib. Vehicle Issued By Issued To 
Who Takes 
Action Actions 
Follow-up 
Reports 
Operating 
Experience 
Level 3 
(OE-3) 
To inform Senior HQ and Field 
Management when an events(s) 
or a trend(s) warrants attention 
by Senior HQ or Field 
Management, but the issue does 
not warrant on OE-1 or OE-2 
report. Highlights important 
environment, safety, and health 
issues for senior management’s 
attention and potential action. 
OPEX Lead Office LL Webpage Office of 
Health, 
Safety and 
Security 
NNSA Principle 
Deputy 
Administrator and 
PSOs.  Registered 
persons are 
notified when 
posted on the 
internet. 
DOE, including 
(GOGO), 
Elements and 
Contractors, as 
applicable 
As appropriate None 
Operating 
Experience 
Summary 
(OES) 
To inform DOE complex of 
DOE or external operating 
experience from which sites 
could benefit. Consists of a 
complication of informative 
operating experience-based 
articles. 
OPEX Lead Office Operating 
Experience 
Summary 
webpage and 
blog 
OPEX 
Lead 
Office 
Internet 
distribution only.  
Registered users 
are notified when 
posted on the 
internet. 
DOE, including 
(GOGO), 
Elements 
As appropriate None

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 210.2B Appendix A—Federal Employees Only 
08-05-2026 Page A-3 
DOE CORPORATE OPERATING EXPERIENCE PROGRAM DOCUMENTS 
Operating 
Experience 
Document Purpose Developed By 
Distrib. 
Vehicle Issued By Issued To 
Who Takes 
Action Actions 
Follow-up 
Reports 
Suspect/ 
Counterfeit 
or Defective 
Items 
(S/CI-D) 
Data 
Collection 
Sheet 
(DCS) 
To provide information on 
S/CI-Ds with potential 
impact to DOE operations. 
Developed from review of 
occurrence reports, the 
Government/Industry Data 
Exchange Program 
(GIDEP), the Institute of 
Nuclear Power (INPO), and 
other sources. 
OPEX Lead Office S/CI-D web 
pages A limited 
number sent by 
push mail to a 
registered users 
list. 
OPEX 
Lead 
Office 
Internet 
distribution only. 
Registered users 
are notified when 
posted on the 
internet. 
DOE, 
including 
(GOGO), 
Elements 
As appropriate None 
DOE 
Lessons 
Learned 
(LL) 
Report 
To provide feedback 
communications on 
identified 
program/mission-specific 
lessons learned across the 
DOE complex. 
DOE 
Complex-wide 
DOE Corporate 
LL Database 
OPEX 
Lead 
Office 
Internet 
distribution only. 
Registered users 
are notified when 
posted on the 
internet. 
DOE, 
including 
(GOGO), 
Elements 
As appropriate None

--- page 10 ---
DOE O 210.2B Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 210.2B, DOE CORPORATE OPERATING EXPERIENCE PROGRAM 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) and flowing down CRD 
requirements to subcontractors at any tier, using a graded approach based on risk to the extent 
necessary to ensure contractor compliance.  
1. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Establish an Operating Experience Program tailored to the nature of the work, 
hazards, and organizational complexities to: 
(1) Develop lessons learned that focus on preventing adverse trends and 
events and on performance improvement or cost savings. 
(2) Screen, distribute, and review DOE Corporate Operating Experience 
Program Operating Experience Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 documents 
defined in Appendix A for site-specific relevance, risks, and 
vulnerabilities, and consider incorporation into contractor activities and 
processes, as appropriate. 
b. Designate an Operating Experience Program Coordinator who can raise operating 
experience issues to senior contractor management, support contractor managers 
in implementing, managing, and overseeing the Operating Experience Program, 
and serve as the point of contact for the DOE Corporate Operating 
Experience Program. 
c. Share contractor-specific lessons learned from operating experience with the DOE 
complex through the DOE Corporate Lessons Learned Database when both 
conditions are met: 
(1) Operating experience has relevance to other DOE facilities, sites, or 
programs; and 
(2) Information has the potential to help avoid adverse operating incidents, for 
performance improvements, or for cost savings.
