--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER  
 Washington, DC 
 
Approved: 8-30-2021 
SUBJECT: PHYSICAL PROTECTION PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE. This Order establishes requirements for the Department of Energy (DOE) 
Physical Protection (PP) Program for assets under the control of DOE.  
2. CANCELLATION. The portions of DOE Order 473.3A Chg. 1 (MinChg), Protection 
Program Operations, dated January 2, 2018, that relate to PP Programs (Attachment 3 
and Annex 1 Safeguards and Security Alarm Management and Control Systems 
[SAMACS]) are hereby cancelled. Policy clarification memoranda related to PP are 
hereby incorporated into this Order and cancelled.  
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements.  
3. APPLICABILITY.  
a. Departmental Applicability. The requirements in this Order apply to all DOE 
elements unless exempted under paragraph 3.c. 
(1) The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) will ensure that NNSA employees and contractors comply with 
their respective responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this 
Order/Notice will be construed to interfere with the NNSA 
Administrator's authority under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 
106-65 to establish Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved 
by the Secretary. Any reference to a Program Secretarial Officer (PSO) 
in this Order is also applicable to the Deputy Administrator/Associate 
Administrators for the NNSA. 
(2) The Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) Administrator must assure 
that BPA employees and contractors comply with their respective 
responsibilities under this directive consistent with BPA's self-
financing, procurement and other statutory authorities. 
DOE Contractors. Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c., the 
CRD (Attachment 1) sets forth requirements of this Order that must apply to 
contracts that include this CRD or its requirements as specified by the contracting 
officer.
DOE O 473.1A

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 473.1A 
 8-30-2021 
 
(1) The CRD must be included in the site/facility management contracts 
that involve classified information or nuclear materials. It must also be 
included in contracts that contain DOE Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) 
clause 952.204-2, titled Security Requirements. Departmental Elements 
must notify contracting officers of affected contracts to incorporate this 
directive into those contracts. 
(2) Upon notification, contracting officers are responsible for incorporating 
this directive into the affected contracts via the DEAR clause 970.0470-
2, Laws, Regulations, and DOE directives clause of the contracts. 
b. Equivalencies/Exemptions. Equivalencies and exemptions from the requirements 
of this Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1, Departmental 
Directive Program, current version.  
(1) Existing equivalencies and exemptions must be reviewed to determine 
applicability under DOE O 473.1A. If applicable, the site must 
document the review was completed and the equivalency or exemption 
remains valid.  
(2) Equivalencies or exemptions from the requirements in this Order, must 
be supported by a vulnerability assessment (VA) or security risk 
assessment (SRA). If a VA or SRA is not applicable in accordance with 
DOE O 470.3, Design Basis Threat (DBT), current version, an analysis 
approved by the responsible Program Office which establishes the basis 
for an informed risk management decision is required. This analysis 
must identify compensatory measures to be implemented, if applicable. 
(3) Equivalencies and exemptions from safeguards and security (S&S) 
requirements within DOE O 473.1A require formal consultation with 
the Office of Security, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and 
Security; and the appropriate Office of the General Counsel (GC) as 
described in DOE O 251.1, current version. The Office of Security will 
respond to consultation requests within 45 business days from the 
receipt of the request. 
(4) All approved equivalencies and exemptions under this Order must be 
entered in the S&S Information Management System (SSIMS) database 
and incorporated into the affected security plan(s) (SP). Approved 
equivalencies and exemptions become a valid basis for operation when 
they have been entered in SSIMS and documented in the appropriate SP 
and incorporated into site procedures. 
(5) DOE S&S program requirements may also be located in, or based on, 
regulations issued by Federal agencies, and codified in the Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFRs), or other authorities, such as Executive 
Orders or Presidential Directives. In such cases, the process for

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 473.1A  3 
8-30-2021 
 
 
deviating from those requirements found in the source document must 
be applied. If the source document does not include a deviation process, 
the DOE GC, or NNSA GC, must be consulted to determine whether 
the Departmental Elements deviation from the source can be legally 
pursued.  
(6) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, codified at 50 USC sections 2406 
and 2511 and to ensure consistency throughout the joint Navy/DOE 
Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval 
Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements and 
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director's 
cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. Departmental Elements must establish and maintain standardized 
requirements for management direction, maintenance of qualifications, and execution of 
operations for the various physical protection activities within DOE.  
a. General. Departmental Elements must ensure S&S programs implement the 
requirements found in the attachments to this Order and contracts that include this 
CRD or its requirements as specified by the contracting officer. 
(1) The Department intends that the highest level of protection be given to 
security interests and activities whose loss, theft, compromise, and/or 
unauthorized use would seriously affect national security, the 
environment, Departmental programs, and/or the health and safety of 
the public or employees. Accordingly, this Order has been developed to 
align with the protection levels (PL) defined within DOE O 470.3C, 
current version.  
(2) Whenever a legal, regulatory, or other external standard, or a DOE 
directive referenced within this Order is amended or superseded, the 
successor document is applicable under this Order. 
b. Planning. PP planning must be based on the adversary capabilities outlined in the 
DBT and the results of SRAs and VAs, as applicable. 
c. Quality Assurance Program (QAP). Each Departmental and associated field 
element(s) must develop and implement a QAP in accordance with DOE O 414.1, 
Quality Assurance, current version, and incorporate into applicable QAP's and 
Quality Implementation Plans. 
d. Records. Security related records including records documenting access control 
must be retained in accordance with the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA) General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6: Security Records.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 473.1A 
 8-30-2021 
 
e. Implementation. 
(1) Compliance with the requirements within this Order, including the 
attachments, must be complete within one (1) year of the issuance date. 
(2) If compliance cannot be accomplished within one (1) year, an 
implementation schedule must be submitted to the appropriate Program 
Secretarial Officer (or their designee), prior to the deadline stated in 
4.e.(1) above. Documentation must include timelines and resources 
needed to fully implement this Order as well as a description of the 
vulnerabilities and impacts created by delayed implementation of the 
requirements.  
f. Contracting Officer (CO) Requirements. The Head of the Departmental Element, 
or his or her designee, must notify the CO and other appropriate subject matter 
experts in the organization that the directive applies to an existing contract or to a 
solicitation for a future contract. 
(1) For existing contracts, the Head of Departmental Element must 
designate appropriate representatives (Federal and/or contractor) to 
work with the CO to develop an appropriately tailored set of standards, 
practice, and controls. 
(2) For existing management and operating (M&O) contracts, after being 
notified by the Head of the Departmental Element or his or her 
designee, the CO must provide the contractor the opportunity to: 
(a) Assess the effect of incorporating the CRD on contract cost, 
funding, schedule, and technical performance, and 
(b) Provide input on the appropriately tailored set of requirements for 
the contract. All associated activities will be accomplished in a 
timely manner and, if applicable, in accordance with the timelines 
established in DEAR 970.5204-2. The CO will incorporate the 
CRD without alteration unless the directive permits alteration and 
the appropriate process is followed.  
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.  
a. Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security. Review, develop, and 
coordinate policy requirements and guidance for the management, operation, and 
performance testing of PP programs and systems based on authority and 
requirements derived from the Atomic Energy Act and DOE Organization Act.  
b. Officially Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA). Fulfill 
requirements and responsibilities that are formally delegated to them from DOE 
or NNSA. ODFSAs are Federal employees that possess the appropriate

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 473.1A  5 
8-30-2021 
 
 
knowledge and responsibilities for each situation to which they are assigned 
through delegation. 
(1) Delegation authority for these positions is originated according to 
direction from the accountable Program Secretarial Officer, (or the 
Secretary or Deputy Secretary for Departmental Elements not organized 
under a Program Secretarial Office), who also provides direction for 
which of the ODFSA positions may be further delegated.  
(2) Each delegation must be documented in written form. It may be 
included in other security plans or documentation approved by or 
according to direction from the accountable principal.  
(3) Each delegator remains responsible for the delegatee’s acts or omissions 
in carrying out the purpose of the delegation.  
c. Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA). Fulfill requirements and 
responsibilities that are formally delegated to them from DOE or NNSA. 
Throughout this Order, in instances where there is no designated ODSA the 
requirements and responsibilities remain with the ODFSA. Officially Designated 
Security Authority (ODSA): ODSAs are Federal or contractor employees that 
possess the appropriate knowledge and responsibilities for each situation to which 
they are assigned through delegation. 
(1) Delegation of authority for these positions is originated according to 
direction from the accountable Program Secretarial Officer, (or the 
Secretary or Deputy Secretary for Departmental Elements not organized 
under a Program Secretarial Office), who also provides direction for 
which of the ODFSA positions may be further delegated.  
(2) Each delegation must be documented in written form. It may be 
included in other security plans or documentation approved by or 
according to direction from the accountable principal. 
(3) Each delegator remains responsible for the delegate’s acts or omissions 
in 
carrying out the purpose of the delegation. 
d. DOE Line Management. DOE line management refers to the chain of 
responsibility that extends from the Secretary of Energy to the Deputy Secretary, 
to the Secretarial Officers who set program policy and plans and develop assigned 
programs, and to the program and Field Element Managers or ODFSAs who are 
responsible for execution of these programs. 
(1) Provide guidance and oversight to site and facility management and 
operations offices that oversee PP programs, for the purposes of 
protecting S&S interests.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 473.1A 
 8-30-2021 
 
(2) Ensure that PP programs under their cognizance are adequately 
managed and maintained for the protection of S&S interests, as required 
by this and other S&S related directives. 
(3) Ensure that systems updates and or patches are installed in accordance 
with manufacturer's instructions.  
(4) Implement the requirements in paragraphs 4.a. through 4.f above. 
e. Heads of Field Elements.  
(1) Administer PP programs for the purposes of protecting pertinent S&S 
interests. 
(2) Ensure contracting officers of responsible contracts incorporate the CRD 
into the contract. 
f. Headquarters Security Operations.  
(1) Administer PP programs for the purposes of protecting Headquarters 
S&S interests. 
(2) Ensure contracting officers of affected contracts incorporate the CRD 
into the contract. 
g. Office of Enterprise Assessments/National Training Center. Develops, maintains, 
and delivers standardized PP training for Federal and contractor employees, in 
order to ensure personnel are appropriately trained to fulfill their mission within 
the Department’s S&S program.  
h. Contracting Officers. 
(1) Upon notification of its applicability, incorporate the CRD into affected 
contracts via the appropriate process.  
(2) Assist originators of procurement requests who want to incorporate the 
requirements of this Order in new non-site/facility management 
contracts, as applicable.  
6. INVOKED STANDARDS. The following industry standards are invoked as required 
methods in this Order in accordance with the applicability and conditions described 
within this Order. Any technical standard or industry standard that is mentioned in or 
referenced by this Order, but is not included in the list below, is not invoked by this 
Order. Note: DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J provides a definition for "invoked technical 
standard." 
a. FED-STD-832, Federal Standard Construction Methods and Materials for Vaults

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 473.1A  7 
8-30-2021 
 
 
b. FIPS 201-2, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and 
Contractors 
c. Intelligence Community Standard (ICS) ICD/ICS 705, Technical Specifications 
for Construction and Management of Sensitive Compartmented Information 
Facilities, Version 1.4 
d. NIST Special Publication 800-116, Rev 1, Guidelines for the Use of PIV 
Credentials in Facility Access 
e. UL 2050, National Industrial Security Systems 
f. UL 634, Standard for Safety Connectors and Switches for Use with Burglar-
Alarm Systems, sections 58, 60, 61, 62, 63 
7. REFERENCES. References specific to this Order are listed in Attachment 8 - Physical 
Protection Program References.  
NOTE: Whenever a legal, regulatory, or other external standard, or a DOE Policy, Order, 
Notice or Manual is referenced, and such standard is amended or superseded, the 
successor standard is applicable under this Order. 
8. DEFINITIONS. Terms commonly used in the program are defined in Attachment 7 - 
Physical Protection Program Definitions.  
9. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Office of 
Security Policy, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security at 
security.directives@hq.doe.gov. Formal policy clarifications should be directed to the 
Director, Office of Security, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
 DAVID M. TURK 
 Deputy Secretary

--- page 8 ---


--- page 9 ---
DOE O 473.1A i 
8-30-2021 
 
 
CONTENTS 
ATTACHMENT 1 CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT ................................... 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 2 PHYSICAL PROTECTION BASELINE REQUIREMENTS .................... 2-1 
CHAPTER I. PHYSICAL PROTECTION PLANNING ..................................................... 2-I-1 
CHAPTER II. SECURITY AREAS .................................................................................... 2-II-1 
CHAPTER III. PROHIBITED AND CONTROLLED ARTICLES .................................. 2-III-1 
CHAPTER IV. POSTING NOTICES ............................................................................... 2-IV-1 
CHAPTER V. SECURITY LOCKS AND KEYS ............................................................... 2-V-1 
CHAPTER VI. BARRIERS............................................................................................... 2-VI-1 
CHAPTER VII. SECURE STORAGE ............................................................................. 2-VII-1 
CHAPTER VIII. ENTRY/EXIT SCREENING .............................................................. 2-VIII-1 
CHAPTER IX. DOE SECURITY AND LOCAL SITE  
SPECIFIC BADGE PROGRAM ............................................................................... 2-IX-1 
ATTACHMENT 3 PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-7 AND PL-8 ASSETS ..................... 3-1 
ATTACHMENT 4 PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-5 AND PL-6 ASSETS ..................... 4-1 
ATTACHMENT 5 PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF PL 1-4 ASSETS ....................................... 5-1 
CHAPTER I. PROTECTION OF PL 1-4 ASSETS.............................................................. 5-I-1 
CHAPTER II. INSPECTION PROGRAMS ....................................................................... 5-II-1 
CHAPTER III. SECURE STORAGE................................................................................. 5-III-1 
CHAPTER IV. PROTECTIVE FORCE POSTS ............................................................... 5-IV-1 
CHAPTER V. BARRIERS .................................................................................................. 5-V-1 
CHAPTER VI. PROTECTION DURING TRANSPORTATION .................................... 5-VI-1 
ATTACHMENT 6 PHYSICAL PROTECTION SYSTEMS ..................................................... 6-1 
CHAPTER I. PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS ............................................. 6-I-1 
CHAPTER II. INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS ...................................................... 6-II-1 
CHAPTER III. VIDEO ASSESSMENT AND SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS ................ 6-III-1

--- page 10 ---
ii DOE O 473.1A 
 8-30-2021 
 
CHAPTER IV. PHYSICAL PROTECTION SYSTEMS TESTING ................................ 6-IV-1 
CHAPTER V. PHYSICAL SECURITY SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE ............................ 6-V-1 
CHAPTER VI. SECURITY COMMUNICATIONS ........................................................ 6-VI-1 
CHAPTER VII. SECURITY ELECTRICAL POWER AND LIGHTING ...................... 6-VII-1 
CHAPTER VIII. SECURITY DATA TRANSMISSION  
AND LINE SUPERVISION .................................................................................... 6-VIII-1 
ATTACHMENT 7 PHYSICAL PROTECTION PROGRAM DEFINITIONS .......................... 7-1 
ATTACHMENT 8 PHYSICAL PROTECTION PROGRAM REFERENCES ........................................ 8-1

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
8-30-2021 Page 1-1 (and 1-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1. CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD. The contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of 
this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the contractor's 
compliance with the requirements.  
In addition to this order contractors are responsible for complying with Attachments 2-8 to 
DOE O 473.1A referenced in and made a part of this CRD and which provide program 
requirements and/or information applicable to contracts in which this CRD is inserted.

--- page 12 ---


--- page 13 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-1 (and 2-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2. PHYSICAL PROTECTION BASELINE REQUIREMENTS 
The intent of this Attachment is to establish baseline requirements for all Department of Energy 
(DOE) Departmental Elements to provide protection to DOE's assets. This and all subsequent 
attachments apply to DOE Employees and Contractors.

--- page 14 ---


--- page 15 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-I-1 
 
 
CHAPTER I.  PHYSICAL PROTECTION PLANNING 
The intent of this Chapter is to provide the requirements for physical protection planning. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Special Nuclear Material (SNM) must be protected at 
the higher level when credible roll up to a higher category can occur.  
If the facility has conducted an analysis and determined that roll up is not credible, the 
security measures that prevent roll up from being credible must remain in place, or the 
material must be protected at the higher level until an analysis determines that roll up to a 
higher category is not credible. 
a. SNM that is classified must receive the physical protection required by the highest 
level of classification or category of SNM, whichever is the more stringent.  
b. Countermeasures must be designed to mitigate the adversary scenarios and 
capabilities described within the DBT.  
c. Security Plans (SPs) must be developed in accordance with DOE O 470.4, 
Safeguards and Security Program, current version. The SP must be approved by 
the ODFSA. 
d. For certain facilities that do not possess a facility clearance the Interagency 
Security Committee Risk Management Process must be used as the baseline for 
the SP (see DOE O 470.4, current version).  
e. Protection measures must be documented in the SP. Cyber security protection 
measures must be consistent with the Departmental Element Cybersecurity 
Program Plan, as required by DOE O 205.1, Cybersecurity Program, current 
version. 
f. For assets requiring an SRA the protection strategy objectives below must be 
addressed in the SP: 
(1) Protection; 
(2) Mitigation; 
(3) Incident Response; and 
(4) Mission Recovery. 
g. Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) equipment used for physical protection 
must be in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter I of this Order.  
h. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) equipment used for physical protection must 
be in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-I-2 8-30-2021 
 
i. Video Assessment and Surveillance Systems (VASS) equipment used for physical 
protection must be in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter III of this Order. 
j. Physical protection systems, including components, must be performance tested 
to ensure overall system effectiveness in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 
IV of this Order. 
k. Physical security system maintenance must be implemented in accordance with 
Attachment 6, Chapter V of this Order. 
l. Communications Systems equipment used for physical protection must be in 
accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter VI of this Order. 
m. Power and lighting equipment used for physical protection must be in accordance 
with Attachment 6, Chapter VII of this Order. 
n. Data transmission and line supervision of security systems equipment used for 
physical protection must be in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter VIII of this 
Order. 
o. Security containers or areas where explosives, pyrotechnics, weapons and/or 
ammunition, not assigned to the protective force (PF), and not located in limited 
areas (LAs), must be stored in a location monitored by IDS or checked at intervals 
to protect against unauthorized access as documented in the SP.  
p. Unmanned Aircraft Systems.  
(1) The ODFSA must approve use of unmanned aircraft systems used for 
security purposes. 
(2) If used, sites must comply with DOE O 440.2, Aviation Management and 
Safety, current version. 
q. Counter Unmanned Aircraft Systems. The ODFSA must approve the use of 
counter unmanned aircraft systems in accordance with the provisions of the 2017 
National Defense Authorization Act [P.L. 114-328] and applicable delegation 
orders.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-II-1 
 
 
CHAPTER II.  SECURITY AREAS 
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for security areas, which are designed to 
provide protection to the Department's assets. 
1. GENERAL ACCESS AREA (GAA). GAAs may be designated by the ODSA to allow 
access to certain areas with minimum-security requirements. 
a. The ODFSA must approve security requirements for those areas designated as 
GAAs based on a risk management process.  
b. Security requirements and the identification of GAA locations must be 
documented in SPs approved by the ODFSA. 
c. The security requirements must be posted to inform all personnel, including the 
public, that entry into these areas subjects them to requirements. 
2. PROPERTY PROTECTION AREA (PPA). PPAs are security areas that are designated to 
protect employees and government owned or leased, buildings, facilities and assets.  
a. The ODSA must approve security measures for those areas designated as PPAs 
based on an analysis in accordance with DOE O 470.4, current version.  
b. PPAs must be configured to provide a means to control access. 
c. Security requirements and the identification of PPA locations must be 
documented in SPs approved by the ODFSA. 
d. Warning signs and/or notices must be posted (see Chapter IV of this Attachment). 
3. LIMITED AREA (LA). LAs are the minimum level security area designated for the 
protection of classified matter, category III SNM, or Departmental assets requiring 
limited access. 
a. Unescorted access must be limited to authorized personnel with the appropriate 
access authorization. 
b. PACS must be installed in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1. 
c. Escort ratios for LAs must be documented in the approved SP. 
d. Measures must be implemented at the LA perimeter to deter, delay and detect 
unauthorized access into an LA, as documented in the approved SP. 
e. Ingress and egress points must be equipped with access control designed to grant 
authorized access and detect unauthorized entry. 
f. LAs must have boundaries defined by physical barriers in accordance with 
Chapter VI of this Attachment.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-II-2 8-30-2021 
 
g. Entry portals must provide the same level of detection as all other points along the 
boundary. 
h. Personnel access to LAs must be controlled in accordance with Attachment 6, 
Chapter I of this Order. 
i. Vehicle access must be for official purposes and meet the following requirements: 
(1) Allow entry via an approved process documented in the SP. 
(2) Allow entry via DOE security badge authentication of all personnel within 
the vehicle by visual inspection, or 
If used, PACS must be implemented in accordance with Attachment 6, 
Chapter I. of this Order.  
(3) Operated by authorized personnel. 
(4) Vehicle is inspected by approved process documented in the SP. 
j. Signs must be posted as documented in the approved SP to convey information 
on: 
(1) Prohibited and controlled articles.  
(2) The inspection of vehicles, packages, hand carried items, and persons 
entering or exiting the security area. 
(3) The use of video surveillance equipment. 
(4) Trespassing (see 42 U.S.C. § 2278a; 10 CFR Part 860).  
4. VAULTS AND VAULT TYPE ROOM (VTR). Vaults and VTRs are established for the 
protection of classified matter and DOE assets requiring limited access and security in 
depth (see Chapter VII of this Attachment). 
5. SENSITIVE COMPARTMENTED INFORMATION FACILITY (SCIF). DOE follows 
the requirements in Intelligence Community Standard (ICS) ICD/ICS 705, Technical 
Specifications for Construction and Management of Sensitive Compartmented 
Information Facilities. 
6. SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAMS (SAPs). The requirements for SAPs are identified in 
DOE O 471.5, Special Access Programs, current version. 
7. PROTECTED AREA (PA). PAs are security areas that are established to protect 
Category II or greater quantities of SNM and may contain classified matter (see 
Attachment 6).

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-II-3 (and 2-II-4) 
 
 
8. MATERIAL ACCESS AREA (MAA). MAAs are security areas that are established to 
protect Category I quantities of SNM (see Attachment 6).

--- page 20 ---


--- page 21 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter III – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-III-1 
 
 
CHAPTER III.  PROHIBITED AND CONTROLLED ARTICLES  
The intent of this Chapter is to prescribe requirements for prohibited and controlled articles.  
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
a. Authorization for prohibited and controlled articles to be used for official 
Government business must be documented in an SP.  
Office of Secure Transportation (OST) Federal Agents, DOE protective 
personnel, other Federal agents, local law enforcement officials with jurisdiction, 
and emergency response personnel whose duties routinely require the carrying 
and operation of prohibited and controlled articles, may be exempt from this 
requirement unless a safety reason exists to prohibit certain communication 
devices, e.g., cellular telephones, transceiver radios and other electronic 
radiating/emitting devices. If such a prohibition exists, it is to be documented in 
specific agreements between the site and the appropriate agency.  
b. Sites are to develop procedures to deter the introduction of prohibited and 
controlled articles. These procedures must be documented in an SP approved by 
the ODFSA.  
c. The articles listed below must not be permitted onto DOE property without 
appropriate authorization.  
2. PROHIBITED ARTICLES. Prohibited articles include but are not limited to: 
a. explosives, 
b. dangerous weapons, as defined by 18 USC § 930, 
c. instruments or material likely to produce substantial injury to persons or damage 
to persons or property, 
d. controlled substances (e.g., illegal drugs and associated paraphernalia but not 
prescription medicine), and 
e. other items prohibited by law. Additional information covering prohibited items 
may be found under the provisions of 18 USC § 930, 21 USC 841 et. seq, 10 CFR 
Part 860 and 41 CFR Chapter 102-74 Subpart C. 
3. CONTROLLED ARTICLES. 
a. Controlled articles such as portable electronic devices (PED), both government 
and personally owned, capable of recording information or transmitting data (e.g., 
audio, video, radio frequency, infrared, and/or data link electronic equipment) are 
not permitted in LAs, VTRs, PAs, and MAAs, without prior written approval.

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter III – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-III-2 8-30-2021 
 
(1) The approval process permitting controlled articles must be documented in 
the approved SP. 
(2) Medical devices with the ability to transmit or record data must be 
approved by the ODFSA. 
(3) Government owned PEDs, information technology systems may only be 
authorized for introduction and use within LA's VTR's, PA's and MAA's 
by the ODFSA. Any ODFSA approval must be based on a documented 
risk analysis incorporating technical security countermeasures and 
cybersecurity input. 
b. For application to SCIFs the ICS 705-1, Physical and Technical Security 
Standards for Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities program guidance 
must be implemented.  
c. See DOE O 471.5, Special Access Programs, current version, for guidance on 
controlled articles in Special Access Program Facilities.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter IV – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-IV-1 
 
 
CHAPTER IV.  POSTING REQUIREMENTS  
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for signs posted at facilities, installations, 
and real property as defined in DOE O 430.1, Real Property Asset Management, current version, 
based on the need to implement Federal statutes protecting against degradation of S&S interests. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
a. 10 CFR Part 860, Trespassing on Department of Energy Property, requires 
facilities, installations, or real property subject to the jurisdiction, administration 
or in the custody of DOE to be published in the Federal Register in order to 
inform the public of the penalties for trespassing or introducing unauthorized 
weapons or dangerous materials (also known as prohibited articles) to these areas. 
b. 10 CFR Part 860 requires DOE to post signs warning of the consequences and 
penalties for trespassing and introducing unauthorized weapons or dangerous 
materials on to DOE controlled property. 
c. The Program Secretarial Office must approve all postings to the Federal Register 
and coordinate the publishing of the notice with the National Archives Office of 
the Federal Register. Additional guidance can be located at 
https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/write.  
d. The Program Secretarial Office must notify the local office of the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation with jurisdiction over the subject property, of the date of posting, 
relocation, removal of posting, or other change, and the identity of the property 
involved. 
2. FEDERAL REGISTER POSTING PROCESS.  
a. Proposals for the posting of facilities, installations, or real property, or 
amendment to or revocation of a previous proposal must be submitted when one 
of the following occurs: 
(1) New property acquisition or a change in existing property owned by or 
contracted to the United States for DOE use. 
(2) New property acquisition or a change in existing property which requires 
protection under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and/or of the DOE 
Organization Act. 
(3) A previous notice needs to be amended or revoked. 
b. Each posting proposal must include: 
(1) The name and specific location of the installation, facility, or real property 
to be covered and the boundary coordinates.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter IV – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-IV-2 8-30-2021 
 
(2) If boundary coordinates are not available, the proposal must include a 
description that will furnish reasonable notice of the area to be covered, 
which may be an entire area or any portion thereof that can be physically 
delineated by the posting indicated in paragraph 2.(c) below. 
c. Each proposal for amendment or revocation must identify the property involved, 
state clearly the action to be taken (i.e., change in property description, correction, 
or revocation), and contain a new or revised property description, if required. 
3. SIGNAGE POSTING REQUIREMENTS. 
a. DOE real property must have signs posted according to statutes, regulations, and 
the administrative requirements for posting specified in this Chapter. 
(1) Section 229 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 as amended (42 U.S.C. § 
2278a), as implemented by 10 CFR Part 860. 
(2) Section 662 of the DOE Organization Act (42 U.S.C. § 7270b), as 
implemented by 10 CFR Part 1048.  
(3) The Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (P. L. 152, 
Ch. 288, 63 Stat. 377, as amended).  
(4) 41 CFR Part102-74, Subpart C governs entry to public buildings and 
grounds under the charge and control of the General Services 
Administration (GSA). 
b. Signs prohibiting trespassing and the introduction of prohibited articles must be 
posted in accordance with 10 CFR Part 860. 
(1) Signs must be configured with a white or yellow background and black 
lettering.  
(2) Signs must measure at least 26.67 centimeters (10.5 inches) by 34.29 
centimeters (13.5 inches). 
c. Signs that notify of the use of deadly force are required for facilities with PL-1 
through PL-4 assets. 
(1) These signs must use a white background with red lettering for the 
words "WARNING USE OF DEADLY FORCE AUTHORIZED" and 
be clearly legible and commensurate with the size of the sign. The 
remaining words should be in black. 
(2) Placement of these signs must be based on the site's determination of 
hostile intent and established rules of engagement.

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter IV – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-IV-3 (and 2-IV-4) 
 
 
d. Placement of signs on fences must not interfere with the function of fence 
mounted IDS. If the signage interferes with the IDS or video assessment and 
surveillance system (VASS), it could be mounted on posts outside the fenced 
area. 
e. The signage must be mounted to establish demarcation of boundaries. This 
demarcation must be easily discernable, determined by the ODSA based on 
analysis to provide reasonable assurance of notice to persons about to enter, and 
documented in the approved SP.

--- page 26 ---


--- page 27 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-V-1 
 
 
CHAPTER V.  SECURITY LOCKS AND KEYS 
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for the Department's security lock and key 
programs based upon the Department of Defense's (DoD) Lock Program. The GSA is a sponsor 
of the DoD Lock Program. More information can be found at the Naval Facilities Engineering 
Systems Command (NAVFAC) website using the following link, 
https://www.navfac.navy.mil/navfac_worldwide/specialty_centers/exwc/products_and_services/
capital_improvements/dod_lock.html 
Note: The General Services Administration, Interagency Advisory Committee on Security 
Equipment (GSA/IACSE) provides the following clarification on the status of the Fedsafes GSA-
approved class 5 security cabinets manufactured under Federal Specification AA-F-358. 
Fedsafes was removed from the GSA Qualified Products List (by QPL-AA-F-358-16) on 9 
September 2017 due to reoccurring inconsistent test results and failure to adequately resolve the 
issues during periodic re-evaluations of their class 5 cabinet.  
Although Fedsafes was removed from the Qualified Products List as an authorized manufacturer, 
the original GSA approval of the existing class 5 cabinets has not been revoked.  
Additionally, the GSA/IACSE in coordination with the Information Security Oversight Office 
(ISOO) is developing a phase-out plan for all GSA-approved security containers and vault doors 
manufactured prior to 1989 (Black GSA Label). The plan will rescind the approval for all GSA-
approved security cabinets and vault doors manufactured from 1954 through 1989 (Black GSA-
Approval labels) to store classified information and materials over a period of 4 years starting on 
as of October 1, 2024.  
The phase-out plan will start with the oldest cabinets (class 2) and proceed to the last of the 
Black Label security equipment (class 5 & 6) over a period of at least 4 years as outlined below. 
All GSA-approved Class 1, 2, 3 & 4 cabinets manufactured under Federal Specifications 
AA-F-357 and AA-F-358 600 (Revision Indicators A - F) will be considered obsolete for 
the storage of classified information and materials as outlined in the below chart. 
All GSA-approved Class 5 & 6 cabinets and vault doors manufactured under Federal 
Specification AA-F-358 (Revision Indicators A - F) and AA-D-600 (Revision Indicators 
A - C) before 1989 will be considered obsolete for the storage of classified information 
and materials as of 1 October 2028.

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-V-2 8-30-2021 
 
Black Label Phased-Out Plan Chart 
GSA 
CLASS 
FED SPEC AMEND YEARS PRODUCED YEARS OF 
SERVICE 
END OF 
SERVICE 
1 AA-F-357 A - F 1968 - 1982 46 - 60 1 October 2028 
2 AA-F-357 A - F 1954 - 1970 50 - 70 1 October 2024 
3 AA-F-358 A - F 1956 - 1968 52 - 69 1 October 2025 
4 AA-F-358 A - F 1956 - 1968 52 - 69 1 October 2025 
5 AA-F-358 A - F 1968 - 1989 31 - 60 1 October 2028 
5 AA-F-363 A - B 1963 - 1989 57 - 65 1 October 2028 
5 AA-D-600 A - B 1963 - 1989 57 - 65 1 October 2028 
6 AA-D-600 A - C 1963 - 1989 57 - 65 1 October 2028 
6 AA-F-358 A - F 1968 - 1989 52 - 60 1 October 2028 
 
The old GSA-approved cabinets and vault doors produced prior to 1989 can be easily identified 
by the silver and black GSA approval label on the outside of the cabinet or vault door and by the 
certification labels and manufacturing dates located on the control drawer body or on the inside 
of the vault door. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Security locks and key categories are based on the types of assets being protected 
and the levels of controls associated with the locks and keys. Non-security locks 
and keys are administrative in nature and are not addressed in this Order. 
b. The ODSA must establish a security lock and key program that: 
(1) Prescribes the installation, replacement, and maintenance requirements for 
security locks. 
(2) Prescribes the requirements for issuance, control and storage of security 
keys. 
(3) Limits the number of keys to the minimum amount needed for operational 
purposes.  
(4) Establishes the inventory system to ensure the accountability of security 
locks, keys, key rings, keyways, and removable pinned cores (as 
applicable). At a minimum, there must be a 100 percent annual inventory 
of all security locks and keys.  
(5) Prescribes the notification requirements for unaccounted for or broken 
security locks and keys in accordance with DOE O 470.4B Chg 2, 
Attachment 5. 
(6) Prescribes the approved destruction methods of inoperative or damaged 
keys.

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-V-3 
 
 
(7) Establishes procedures for key turn in when personnel or programs are 
terminating or when an individual no longer has a need for the key. 
(8) Includes a strategy for the use and protection of grand master, master, sub-
master, and control keys. 
(9) Is documented in the SP. 
c. Keyed cylinders must meet Grade 1 American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) Standard A 156.30-2014, American National Standard for High Security 
Cylinders and either; 
(1) Grade 1 ANSI/A156.2-2017, Bored and Preassembled Locks and Latches, 
or  
(2) Grade 1 ANSI A156.13-2017, Mortise Locks and Latches. 
d. At locations implementing a multifaceted Insider Threat Mitigation Program and 
a Human Reliability Program (HRP), locksmiths must be analyzed for inclusion 
in HRP in accordance with 10 CFR §712.10.  
2. LEVEL I LOCKS AND KEYS.  
a. Level I locks including those that provide access to classified matter, MAAs, 
vaults and VTRs must be: 
(1) Locks that meet Federal Specification FF-L-2740B, Amendment 2, Locks, 
Combination, Electromechanical and Federal Specification FF-L-2890C, 
Amendment 3, Lock Extensions (Pedestrian Door Lock Assembly 
Preassembled, Panic, and Auxiliary Deadbolt) or 
(2) High security, shrouded shackle, key operated padlocks with Grade 1 
ANSI hasps, that meet standards in Military Specification MIL DTL 
43607J, Padlock, Key Operated, High Security, Shrouded Shackle or 
(3) A High Security Deadbolt Locking System, Internal Locking Device 
(ILD) (dual cylinder model only) that meet DODM S-5210.41-M-V2 
Nuclear Weapon Security Manual Enclosure 2, Section 3.b.(6)(c)(U).  
(4) Combination padlocks meeting Federal Specification FF-P-110J may be 
used to secure storage areas for SNM or, bulky material containing 
Secret or Confidential information. 
Hasps and yokes on containers storing classified matter must be 
constructed of steel material, be at least 6.35 millimeters (¼ inch ) in 
diameter or equivalent cross section, and be secured to the container by 
welding, or riveting, to preclude removal.

--- page 30 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-V-4 8-30-2021 
 
b. Six locks have been approved under FF-L-2740B for the protection of classified 
matter. The Mas-Hamilton Group model X-07 lock was approved in February 
1992, the X-08 in March 1999, the Kaba Mas X-09 in June 2002, the Sargent & 
Greenleaf (S&G) model 2740 in June 2010, the Kaba Mas X-10 in April 2013, 
and the S&G model 2740B in November 2013.The X-07 and X-08 locks have 
reached the end of their expected service life and a plan to replace these locks 
must be developed by the ODSA and documented.  
c. The following combination locks are approved for the protection of Category I 
and II SNM: 
(1) Kaba Mas model X-09; 
(2) S&G model 2740B; or, 
(3) Kaba Mas model X-10.  
3. LEVEL I LOCK AND KEY CONTROL. 
a. Level I key blanks must be restricted/proprietary; specifically, the blank must be 
unique to the site (e.g., it does not use a commercially available master key 
blank). Level I key blanks must be stored and protected as outlined in 3.e. below. 
b. Level I key codes (information required to replicate/cut a key) must be stored and 
protected as outlined in 3.e below. 
c. Access to Level I keys and key codes must be controlled and limited to personnel 
with an access authorization commensurate to the classification of the assets to 
which the keys or codes provide access. 
d. Once they are put in service inside a security area, Level I security locks and keys 
must not leave the security area without authorization as described in the SP. Any 
key that leaves the security area without authorization must be considered 
unaccounted for and reported as lost.  
e. When not in use, Level I security locks and keys must be stored in a: 
(1) GSA approved container; or 
(2) LA or higher within a locked receptacle or room; or 
(3) Vault or VTR. 
f. Locks meeting FF-L-2740 not in use, and set to default, may be stored in a locked 
receptacle or room within a PPA. 
g. Level I keys must be on a separate key ring from all other levels of keys

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-V-5 
 
 
(1) Level I keys must be permanently marked with a unique identifying 
number, and  
(2) A unique identifying number must be placed on each key ring. 
h. All parts of broken Level I security keys must be recovered. If the functional part 
of the key (the blade) is lost or not retrievable it must be reported as a lost/missing 
key and measures must be taken to replace the corresponding lock(s).  
i. When a Level I security key is unaccounted for, immediate notification must be 
made to the ODSA and compensatory measures must be immediately initiated.  
If an unaccounted for Level I key cannot be located within 24 hours, the 
affected lock must be changed. 
4. LEVEL II SECURITY LOCKS. 
a. Locations protecting PL-6 assets; Category III SNM; firearms and explosives 
require Level II security locks and keys. 
b. Level II locks must meet the requirements of one of the below: 
(1) ANSI grade 1 keyed locksets with grade 1 cylinders, 
(2) Commercial Item Descriptions (CID) A-A-59486C, Padlock Set 
(individually keyed or keyed alike), 
(3) CID A-A-59487C, Padlock (key operated), or 
(4) Meet the requirements of Federal Specification FF-L-2937, Combination 
Locks, Mechanical, and its Amendment 2 with an FF-L-2890C Pedestrian 
door lock assembly. 
5. LEVEL II LOCK AND KEY CONTROL. 
a. When not in use, Level II security locks and keys must be stored in a: 
(1) GSA approved container; or,  
(2) Locked cabinet or drawer or otherwise secured in a PPA or higher; or,  
(3) Vault or VTR. 
b. Level II locks and keys once put into service must not leave the site without 
authorization as described in the SP. 
c. All parts of broken Level II security keys must be recovered. If the functional part 
of the key (the blade) is lost or not retrievable it must be reported as a lost/missing 
key and measures must be taken to replace the corresponding lock(s).

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter V – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-V-6 8-30-2021 
 
d. Level II keys must be permanently marked with a unique identifying number. 
e. Level II-III keys may be combined on the same key ring with a unique identifying 
number; however, the key ring must be protected according to the highest level of 
key on the ring.  
6. LEVEL III SECURITY LOCKS. 
a. Locations where Category IV SNM are stored and other areas designated by the 
ODSA require level III security locks and keys. 
b. Level III lock types must be authorized by the ODSA. 
7. LEVEL III LOCK AND KEY CONTROL. 
a. When not in use, Level III security locks and keys must be stored in a manner 
approved by the ODSA. 
b. All parts of broken Level III security keys must be recovered unless the functional 
part of the key (the blade) is lost or not retrievable.  
c. Level III keys must be permanently marked with a unique identifying number. 
d. Level II-III keys may be combined on the same key ring with a unique identifying 
number; however, the key ring must be protected according to the highest level of 
key on the ring.

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VI – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VI-1 
 
 
CHAPTER VI.  BARRIERS 
The intent of this chapter is to prescribe requirements for physical barriers, which serve as the 
physical demarcation of security areas. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
a. The ODFSA must determine, based on analysis in accordance with DOE O 470.4, 
current version, what barriers are required for GAAs and PPAs.  
b. The following requirements apply to LAs:  
(1) Passive barriers such as fences, walls, and doors or active barriers such 
as bollards, wedge barriers, or sliding gates must be employed to deter 
and delay unauthorized access and control authorized access.  
(2) At a minimum, an analysis is required of DOE assets to determine the 
protection measures against vehicle borne improvised explosive devices 
(VBIED) to mitigate the DBT adversary threat.  
(3) Barriers must be used:  
(a) To direct the flow of personnel and vehicular traffic through 
designated entry points/portals; 
(b) To permit efficient operation of access controls and entry point 
inspections; and  
(c) To support the ability to engage adversaries along all feasible 
pathways. 
(4) Entry points/portals must be designed to provide a barrier resistant to 
bypass. 
(5) Permanent barriers must be used to enclose LAs, except during 
construction or temporary activities, when temporary barriers may be 
erected in accordance with locally approved procedures.  
2. PENETRATION OF SECURITY AREA BARRIERS. Penetration of security area 
barrier requirements include the following: 
a. Elevators that penetrate a security area barrier must be provided with an access 
control system that is equivalent to the access control requirements for the 
security area being penetrated. 
b. Utility corridors that penetrate security area barriers must provide the same degree 
of penetration resistance as the barriers they penetrate.

--- page 34 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter VI – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-VI-2 8-30-2021 
 
c. Objects that intruders could use to scale or bridge barriers and enter security areas 
must be removed or secured to prevent their unauthorized use. 
d. If a security area configuration is altered, barriers must be erected, and at a 
minimum, an analysis must be conducted and documented in accordance with 
locally approved procedures to validate equivalent protection measures. 
e. The barrier design must consider proximity to buildings or overhanging 
structures. 
3. HARDWARE.  
a. Screws, nuts, bolts, hasps, clamps, bars, wire mesh, hinges, and hinge pins must 
be fastened securely to preclude removal and to ensure visual evidence of 
tampering.  
b. Hardware accessible from outside the security area must be peened, brazed, or 
spot welded to preclude removal, or  
c. The area must be otherwise secured by use of tamper resistant hardware (e.g., 
non-removable hinge pins), or  
d. By other means as described in the SP. 
Note: These requirements do not apply to fencing.  
4. FENCING. When used to protect security areas designated as LAs or higher, fencing 
installed or modified after the issuance of this order must meet the following 
requirements: 
a. Permanent Security Fencing Materials and Specifications. 
(1) Chain link fabric consisting of a minimum of No. 11 American Wire 
Gauge (AWG) galvanized steel wire with mesh openings not larger than 
5.08 centimeters (2 inches) must be used.  
(2) Fencing must be topped by three or more strands of barbed wire, coiled 
barbed wire, or barbed tape coil with single or double outriggers. The 
direction of the single outrigger is at the discretion of the ODSA. For PAs 
this only applies to the inner fence. 
(3) Overall fence height, excluding barbed wire or barbed tape coil topping, 
must be a minimum of 2.13 meters (7 feet) above grade. 
(4) Fence lines must be kept clear of vegetation, trash, equipment, and other 
objects that could impede observation or facilitate bridging.

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VI – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VI-3 
 
 
(5) Gate hardware that if removed would facilitate unauthorized entry, must 
be installed in a manner to mitigate tampering and/or removal (e.g., by 
brazing, peening, or welding). 
(6) Posts, bracing, and other structural members must be located on the inside 
of security fences. 
(7) Wire ties used to fasten fence fabric to poles must be of the same or more 
robust gauge than that of the fence fabric. 
Note: Other fencing types (architectural or decorative) may be used without an 
equivalency if they have been performance tested to establish that the resulting 
barrier provides delay and deterrence equivalent to or greater than the above 
requirements and are documented in the SP. 
b. Permanent Security Fencing. When permanent fencing is used to enclose LAs or 
higher, fencing must meet the following construction requirements: 
(1) Areas under security fencing subject to water flow, such as bridges, 
culverts, ditches, and swales, must be blocked with wire, steel bars, or 
other methods that provide for the passage of floodwater but also provide 
a penetration delay equal to that of the security fence.  
(2) Fencing must extend to within 5.08 centimeters (2 inches) of firm ground 
or below the surface. 
(a) Surfaces must be stabilized in areas where loose sand, shifting 
soils, or surface waters may cause erosion and thereby assist an 
intruder in penetrating the area. 
(b) Where surface stabilization is impossible or impractical, concrete 
curbs, sills, or a similar type of anchoring device extending below 
ground level must be provided. 
(3) Alternate barriers or terrain may be used instead of fencing if the 
penetration resistance of the barrier is equal to or greater than security 
fencing specified in this Chapter. An analysis must be conducted and 
documented in accordance with locally approved procedures. 
c. Temporary Security Fencing. Temporary barriers must effectively impede access 
to the area. During construction or temporary activities, security fencing must be 
installed to:  
(1) Exclude unauthorized vehicular and pedestrian traffic from the security 
area, 
(2) Restrict authorized vehicular traffic to designated access roads, and

--- page 36 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter VI – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-VI-4 8-30-2021 
 
(3) Comply with locally approved procedures and operational requirements. 
5. PERIMETER BARRIER GATES. Controls for motorized gates used at entry 
points/portals must be located within PF posts or other locations as described in the SP. 
Motorized gates must be designed to facilitate manual operation during power outages. 
6. EXTERIOR WALLS. Walls that constitute exterior barriers of security areas must extend 
from the true floor to the true ceiling unless equivalent means are used to provide 
evidence of penetration of the security area or access to the security interest being 
protected.  
7. CEILING AND FLOORS. Ceilings and floors must be constructed of building materials 
that offer penetration resistance to, and evidence of, unauthorized entry into the area. 
8. DOORS. For LAs and above doors, door frames, door threshold, and door jambs 
associated with walls serving as barriers must provide the necessary barrier delay 
required by the SP. Requirements include the following: 
a. Penetration Resistance Doors. Doors with transparent glazing material must offer 
penetration resistance to, and evidence of, unauthorized entry into the area. Doors 
that serve exclusively as emergency and evacuation exits from security areas 
must: 
(1) Not permit access to the security area from outside the security area; and 
(2) Comply with National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101. 
b. Astragals or Mullions. An astragal or mullion must be used where doors used in 
pairs meet.  
Door louvers, baffles, or astragals/mullions must be reinforced and immovable 
from outside the area being protected. 
c. Visual Access. Visual barriers must be used if visual access is a factor. 
9. WINDOWS. The following design requirements must be applied to security windows 
when used as physical barriers. 
a. Windows must offer penetration resistance to, and evidence of, unauthorized 
entry into the area. 
b. Frames must be securely anchored in the walls and windows locked from the 
inside or installed in fixed (non-operable) frames so the panes are not removable 
from outside the area under protection. 
c. Visual barriers must be used if visual access is a factor.

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VI – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VI-5 (and 2-VI-6) 
 
 
10. MISCELLANEOUS OPENINGS. The following requirements apply to LAs, Vaults, 
VTRs, PAs, and MAAs. 
a. Barriers or detection are required for all miscellaneous openings penetrating 
security area boundaries for which the opening is larger than 619.20 square 
centimeters (96 square inches) in area and larger than 15.24 centimeters (6 inches) 
in the smallest dimension. 
b. Detection and/or barrier designs for miscellaneous openings must be addressed in 
the SP. At a minimum, barriers must be; 
(1) 9 gauge wire mesh;  
(2) 9 gauge expanded metal; or,  
(3) Solid steel bars at least 1.3 centimeters (0.5 inches) in diameter secured in 
a way to prevent unauthorized removal e.g., welded vertically and 
horizontally 15.24 centimeters (6 inches) on center.  
c. Alternate barriers providing equivalent or greater protection must be supported by 
a documented analysis. 
d. The delay material must be securely fastened to preclude removal.  
e. Where used, wire mesh, expanded metal, or solid steel bars must be mounted so 
that classified matter or SNM cannot be removed.  
f. When pipe or conduit pass through a wall, the annular space between the sleeve 
and the pipe or conduit must be filled with permanent material that would leave 
evidence of surreptitious removal of the pipe or conduit.

--- page 38 ---


--- page 39 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VII – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VII-1 
 
 
CHAPTER VII.  SECURE STORAGE 
The intent of this Chapter is to prescribe requirements for secure storage of certain Departmental 
assets. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
a. Classified Storage. The storage requirements for classified matter, including non-
conforming storage can be found in DOE O 471.6, Information Security, current 
version. 
b. Classified Conference Rooms. Conference rooms and other similar facilities 
approved for classified discussions/processing must be located in a LA or higher 
and implement the provisions of DOE O 470.6, Technical Security Program, 
current version. 
c. Vaults and VTRs.  
(1) IDS must be installed in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this 
Order. 
(2) When used as storage all perimeter doors must be secured using locks as 
required by Chapter V of this Attachment (does not apply to emergency 
egress only doors). 
(3) Access to vaults and VTRs must be strictly controlled and based on an 
appropriate access authorization and need to know.  
(4) Means of controlling access must be documented in an SP. 
(5) Access controls at vaults and VTRs must provide logging or recording of 
all entries.  
(a) In vaults and VTRs utilizing vestibules/foyers (where no access to 
SNM or classified is possible), logging entry is not required unless 
entry is made into the vault or VTR.  
(b) Where PACS is not used, the ODFSA may waive the requirement 
for repeated logging for personnel whose offices are located within 
the boundary of the vaults and VTRs. 
(6) Persons without need to know or the appropriate access authorization must 
be escorted at all times. 
(a) Entries must be logged or recorded and must include the name and 
date/time of entry and exit of the individual and the escort.

--- page 40 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter VII – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-VII-2 8-30-2021 
 
(b) Protective measures to mask classified matter must be used before 
visitors or cleared persons without need to know are granted 
access. 
(7) Vault and VTR doors must remain closed and controlled at all times. 
When a door needs to be open, it must be continually monitored by an 
authorized and cleared individual. 
2. VAULTS AND VAULT TYPE ROOMS. The following minimum standards are required 
for all new construction, renovations, alterations, modifications and repairs that impact 
the integrity of the structure of vaults and VTRs.  
a. Approval. The ODFSA must approve all construction and the methods used 
before the storage of classified matter or other S&S interests is authorized. 
b. Vaults.  
(1) Vault construction must comply with Class A from Federal Standard 
(FED-STD-832), Construction Methods and Materials for Vaults. 
(2) A modular vault meeting Class B of FED-STD-832 may be used in lieu of 
a vault. 
c. VTR. VTR construction standards must comply with the following requirements.  
(1) The perimeter walls, floors, and ceiling must be permanently 
constructed and attached to one another.  
Walls that constitute exterior barriers must extend from the true floor to 
the true ceiling unless equivalent means are used to provide evidence of 
penetration of the security area or access to the security interest being 
protected (see (10) and (11) below). 
(2) The walls, floor, ceiling and door and door frame must be constructed of 
materials which provide comparable penetration resistance.  
(3) All construction must be done in a manner that provides visual evidence of 
unauthorized penetration. Evidence of unauthorized penetration may 
consist of damaged surfaces, missing paint, and suspicious patching 
inconsistent with surrounding finishes. 
(4) Floor and wall construction materials must offer resistance to and 
evidence of unauthorized entry into the VTR.  
(5) For floors and walls, if insert type panels are used, a method must be 
devised to prevent their removal without leaving visual evidence of 
tampering.

--- page 41 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VII – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VII-3 
 
 
(6) Should any of the outer walls/floors or ceilings be adjacent to space where 
security is not controlled by DOE, the walls must be constructed of or 
reinforced with more substantial building materials such as brick, 
concrete, corrugated metal, wire mesh, etc.  
(7) Windows that can be routinely opened and are installed at a height of less 
than 5.48 meters (18 feet) from any point adjacent to the window that 
would permit unrestricted access must be:  
(a) Provided with protective measures to delay or deter entry or to 
notify the response force of an attempted entry. 
(b) During non-working hours, the windows must be closed and 
securely fastened to preclude surreptitious entry. 
(8) If visual access is a security concern,  
(a) Barrier walls must be opaque or translucent;  
(b) Windows must be closed and locked and must be translucent or 
opaque; and,  
(c) Doors that have windows, door louvers, baffle plates or service 
panels, or similar openings must be covered with translucent or 
opaque coverings.  
(9) Perimeter doors must be of wood or metal.  
(a) Wooden doors must be of solid core construction, 4.445 
centimeters (1.75 inches) thick, or at a minimum faced on the 
exterior side with at least 16-gauge sheet metal. 
(b) Hardware must be fastened in such a way to reveal or preclude 
surreptitious removal and to ensure visual evidence of tampering.  
(c) Hardware accessible from outside the area must be peened, pinned, 
brazed, or spot welded to preclude removal. 
(d) Doors that have windows, door louvers, baffle plates or service 
panels, or similar openings must be secured with 18 gauge 
expanded metal or wire mesh fastened inside the VTR to preclude 
unauthorized entry.  
(e) When doors are used in pairs, an astragal or mullion must be 
installed where the doors meet. Both doors must be 
locked/secured.

--- page 42 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter VII – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-VII-4 8-30-2021 
 
(f) Emergency egress doors (when not used for ingress) must be 
locked (level I lock not required) in accordance with NFPA 101 
Life Safety Code and have no exterior hardware. 
(10) Ceilings. 
(a) When barrier walls do not extend to the true ceiling and a false 
ceiling is created, the false ceiling must be reinforced with 18 
gauge expanded metal or wire mesh to serve as a true ceiling or 
ceiling tile clips must be secured. 
1 Any wire mesh or expanded metal used must overlap the 
adjoining walls and be secured to show evidence of any 
tampering. 
2 When ceiling tile clips are used, a minimum of four clips 
per tile must be installed.  
3 If the ceiling tile cannot accommodate four clips, the 
maximum number of clips that can be accommodated on 
the tile must be used.  
4 The clips must be installed from the interior of the area, and 
each clip must be mounted to preclude surreptitious entry. 
5 If 1-4 above cannot be met, IDS must be used above the 
ceiling tile. 
(b) In some instances, it may not be practical to erect a solid 
suspended ceiling as part of the VTR. In such cases, IDS must be 
used to ensure that the area cannot be entered surreptitiously.  
(11) When barrier walls do not extend to the true floor and a raised/false floor 
greater than 15.24 centimeters (6 inches) is created, the IDS is required 
below the raised floor.

--- page 43 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter VIII – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-VIII-1 (and 2-VIII-2) 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII.  ENTRY/EXIT SCREENING 
The intent of this Chapter is to prescribe the requirements for the Department's random entry and 
exit screening program.  
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Inspections are mandatory at PAs and MAAs (see 
Attachment 5, Chapter II), random inspections may be conducted at other designated 
areas. 
a. The ODFSA must determine the need and approve the scope and locations of 
screening programs at PPAs and LAs.  
b. Screening programs must be documented in the SP.  
2. IMPLEMENTATION. Where implemented the entry/exit inspection program must be 
documented in an SP or procedure. Screening programs must include the following: 
a. Entry Inspections. Searches of personnel, vehicles, and all hand carried items 
must be performed to deter and detect prohibited article introduction.  
b. Exit Inspections. Personnel, vehicles, and all hand carried items must be inspected 
to deter and detect unauthorized removal of classified matter or other S&S 
interests from designated security areas.

--- page 44 ---


--- page 45 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-IX-1 
 
 
CHAPTER IX.  DOE SECURITY AND LOCAL SITE SPECIFIC BADGE PROGRAM 
The intent of this Chapter is to prescribe requirements for the Department's Security badges.  
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Security badges are used to support physical access 
control operations at DOE facilities. The DOE security badge is the Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 12 (HSPD-12) Personal Identification Verification (PIV) 
credential, which establishes a mandatory, Federal government-wide standard for 
identification and physical access to Federally controlled facilities.  
a. Site specific requirements and procedures for receiving and escorting visitors 
must be developed and approved by DOE line management or the ODFSA and 
documented in the site's SP.  
b. Visitors not possessing PIV credentials must present a state-issued driver's license 
or identification card that is compliant with the REAL ID Act of 2005.  
c. If the visitor does not possess a state-issued driver's license or identification that is 
compliant with the REAL ID Act then the individual must present an acceptable 
document to establish identity following instructions listed on the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Form I-9, “Employment Eligibility Verification" (see 
http://www.uscis.gov/i-9 and http://www.tsa.gov/traveler-information/acceptable-
ids).  
The following alternate access control procedures, as identified in the DHS REAL 
ID Implementation Guide, if implemented must be approved by the ODFSA when 
a REAL ID compliant form of identification is not presented for access: 
(1) Escort of a visitor listed in a visitor control log without having to 
present ID; or,  
(2) Escort of a visitor presenting a non-compliant driver's license or ID; or 
(3) Use of a knowledge-based authentication to establish identity.  
d. Use of the DOE badges with PACS is described in Attachment 6, Chapter 1 of 
this Order. 
e. DOE PIV and Local Site Specific Only (LSSO) badges must display the holder's 
access authorization level. 
2. DOE BADGES.  
a. DOE PIV Credentials. 
(1) The DOE PIV credential must be issued to all Federal employees and 
contractor employees who require long term (greater than six months) 
physical access to DOE facilities or information systems. Logical access

--- page 46 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-IX-2 8-30-2021 
 
falls under the purview of the Chief Information Officer. Physical 
access falls under the purview of DOE Office of Environment, Health, 
Safety, and Security. 
(2) The DOE PIV credential must be recognized for physical access at all 
DOE sites and facilities.  
(3) The identity verification and issue process is described in FIPS 201-2, 
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and 
Contractors. 
(4) Specifications for the DOE PIV credential are described in National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 800-73 and FIPS 201-2, 
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and 
Contractors.  
b. Local Site Specific Only (LSSO) Badges. 
(1) When necessary to facilitate temporary (less than six months), or non-
routine access, DOE line management or Officially Designated Federal 
Security Authority (ODFSA) may authorize the issuance of Local Site-
Specific Only (LSSO) badges for physical access as documented in the 
approved Security Plan (SP). LSSO Badges may be developed and 
issued to address a variety of issues and unique local badging 
requirements. Example scenarios where this might apply include facility 
access cards issued to short term and non-routine individuals (e.g., 
employees with forgotten/misplaced PIV, summer interns, vendors).  
(a) If LSSOs are used, the design, issuance, accountability and 
return process must be documented.  
(b) LSSO badges must not resemble the design or color of the DOE 
PIV credential.  
(c) LSSOs must not be recognized outside the jurisdiction of the 
cognizant ODFSA.  
(d) For ongoing construction projects longer than six months, 
contractors may be issued an LSSO badge providing access to 
the construction area.  
1 Provided they are not permanently assigned to another 
DOE facility; and  
2 Do not require unrestricted physical access to other 
Departmental assets, security areas, and buildings; and

--- page 47 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-IX-3 
 
 
3 Have received a favorably adjudicated HSPD-12 Federal 
background investigation.  
(2) Military and other Federal department and agency personnel who 
possess PIV credentials and who are assigned/detailed to DOE must 
have their badge enrolled in the appropriate DOE PACS, where 
possible, or issued an LSSO badge. 
(3) Military and other Federal department and agency personnel who 
possess HSPD 12 credentials/badges issued by their respective 
organizations may, at the discretion of the DOE cognizant office, be 
permitted entry to a PPA without further badging.  
(a) Even though the person possesses an HSPD 12 credential/badge, 
issued by another Federal department or agency, the local 
visitation process must be followed. 
(b) If there is a requirement for entry beyond a PPA or access to 
SNM, nuclear weapons, or classified matter, the provisions of 
paragraph (4) below must be followed.  
(4) Visitors possessing a commensurate access authorization who require 
access to a LA, PA, MAA, SNM, nuclear weapons or classified matter 
must verify identity and appropriate access authorization in accordance 
with local procedures or submit a DOE F 5631.20, Request for Visit or 
Access Approval, prior to arriving at the site. Visitors may be issued a 
temporary LSSO badge for the visit. 
c. Foreign National Badges.  
(1) Foreign Nationals who have been in the United States for three or more 
continuous years and require access longer than six months must be 
issued a DOE PIV credential, in accordance with FIPS 201-2. Foreign 
National access must be processed in accordance with DOE O 142.3, 
Unclassified Foreign Visits and Assignments Program prior to issuance 
of the PIV. 
(2) Foreign Nationals who have been in the United States for less than three 
years and require access longer than six months may be issued an LSSO 
at the discretion of the Secretarial Program Office based on a risk 
determination.  The risk determination must be documented and based 
on the results of the following: 
(a) FBI fingerprint based National Criminal History Check (NCHC), 
(b) FBI Investigations files (Name Check), 
(c) Name check against the Terrorist Screening database,

--- page 48 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-IX-4 8-30-2021 
 
(d) USCIS Check against SAVE, and, 
(e) Any additional requirements in DOE O 142.3, Unclassified 
Foreign Visits and Assignments Program 
(3) Foreign Nationals may be issued an LSSO badge for access less than six 
months for unclassified site access after an identity verification process 
has been completed by the foreign visits and assignments staff of the 
organization sponsoring the visit in accordance with DOE O 142.3, 
Unclassified Foreign Visits and Assignments Program prior to issuance 
of the badge. 
3. EMERGENCY RESPONSE OFFICIAL (ERO). Personnel designated by their 
organizations as EROs as described in FIPS 201-2, can be issued a DOE PIV 
credential with the words "Emergency Response Official" in accordance with FIPS 
201-2.  
4. ISSUANCE, USE, RECOVERY, AND DESTRUCTION OF DOE PIV AND LSSO 
BADGES. 
a. Procedures. DOE line management or ODFSA must approve local procedures for 
issuance, use, accountability, and return of DOE PIV credentials and LSSO 
badges.  
(1) DOE PIV credentials must be processed and issued in accordance with 
FIPS 201-2. 
(2) Measures must be taken to ensure that a single individual cannot 
process and/or issue an LSSO badge allowing unauthorized access. 
(3) Personnel with the ability to edit access to security areas, authentication 
mechanism data, security access authorization data in badging systems 
must be cleared at the same level as the highest access authorization in 
the system.  
(4) Sites must implement procedures to control access to security systems 
that maintain badging and clearance information. 
(5) The information on the badge must not be used for any purpose other 
than access control (physical or logical).  
(6) The information on the badge must not be collected or stored outside of 
DOE access control systems without prior authorization in accordance 
with established procedures for the control and protection of the 
information.

--- page 49 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 2-IX-5 
 
 
b. Individual Changes of Appearance. A DOE badge must be confiscated and 
reissued, with a new photograph, if the individual's appearance no longer 
resembles the person in the photograph. 
c. Badge Holder Name Change. A DOE badge must be replaced when the badge 
holder's name is legally changed. 
d. Recovery of DOE Badges. Local procedures, approved by the ODFSA, must be 
established for the recovery of the badge whenever an individual has terminated 
employment, their access authorization status changes, or they no longer require 
the badge.  
e. Badge Destruction. DOE badges that are deactivated or no longer needed must be 
destroyed so that the badge cannot be reconstructed.  
(1) If destruction is not immediate, badges must be stored at a minimum, in 
a locked container until they can be destroyed.  
(2) DOE PIV credential must be destroyed in a manner approved by 
Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) FIPS 201-2, Personal 
Identity Verification of Federal Employees and Contractors. 
5. ACCOUNTABILITY OF DOE BADGES.  
a. The issuing office must maintain badging records to include the badge number; 
date of issuance; badge holder's name and organization; and the date of 
destruction, when applicable. 
b. A record of missing DOE badges must be maintained.  
(1) Personnel and/or systems controlling access to DOE security areas must 
be provided current information regarding missing badges to prevent 
badge misuse.  
(2) The theft or loss and recovery of DOE issued security badges must be 
reported immediately in accordance with locally approved procedures. 
c. Records must be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the local 
records management program. Personal data must be protected from loss or 
compromise (see 5 U.S.C. 522a). 
6. PROTECTION OF DOE BADGE MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Stocks of badging 
materials, unissued DOE PIV credentials and LSSO badges, and processing equipment 
must be stored in a locked room, filing cabinet or GSA approved container.  
7. DOE BADGE VALIDATION. Badge validation procedures at access control points must 
be documented in the SP.

--- page 50 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter IX – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 2-IX-6 8-30-2021 
 
a. Badge validation procedures must be performed by PACS or physical 
examination of the DOE badge. For PIV credential, physical examination must be 
performed in accordance with FIPS 201-2.  
b. Other methods of validation for LSSO badges may be approved by the ODFSA. 
8. DOE BADGE RECIPIENT REQUIREMENTS. A written or electronic record of 
acknowledgement must be provided by the badge recipient of the following 
responsibilities. 
a. Protecting the DOE PIV Credential through the use of only FIPS-201-2 compliant 
badge holders. 
b. Protecting the DOE PIV credential/LSSO security badge against loss, theft, or 
misuse.  
c. Reporting a lost, stolen, or misused badge to the issuing office within 24 hours of 
discovery. 
d. Protecting its integrity by ensuring that the badge is not altered, photocopied, 
counterfeited, reproduced, or photographed (other than for official government 
business). 
e. Returning the DOE PIV credential/LSSO badge when it is no longer valid or 
required. 
f. Surrendering or returning the DOE PIV credential/LSSO badge when requested 
according to local procedures. 
g. Wearing the DOE PIV credential/LSSO badge conspicuously, photo side out, in a 
location above the waist and on the front of the body while having access to DOE 
facilities. (This requirement may be modified for operational or safety reasons.)  
h. When not on Federally controlled, owned, or leased property the badge should be 
removed or obscured from visual access. This does not preclude the use for 
identification purposes as necessary.

--- page 51 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 3-1 (and 3-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3. PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-7 AND PL-8 ASSETS 
The intent of this Attachment is to prescribe protection requirements for PL-7 and PL-8 assets. 
These are departmental assets that do not meet the criteria for other PLs. These requirements are 
in addition to those physical protection requirements outlined in Attachment 2 of this Order.

--- page 52 ---


--- page 53 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 3, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 3-I-1 
 
 
CHAPTER I.  PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-7 ASSETS 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
a. A facility must not possess, receive, process, transport, or store safeguards and 
security assets until that facility has been cleared (see DOE O 470.4, current 
version). 
b. The protection strategy of PL-7 assets is order compliance. The following require 
an SRA: PL-7 high value assets (as defined by Program Secretarial Officers), 
non-conforming storage of classified matter, noncompliant storage of Category III 
or IV SNM, or SNM as part of a roll-up analysis. The objectives of the protection 
strategy used for PL-7 assets requiring an SRA are: 
(1) Protection; 
(2) Mitigation; 
(3) Incident Response; and 
(4) Mission Recovery. 
2. BIOLOGICAL AGENTS. PL-7 assets identified as biological agents requiring biosafety 
level (BSL)-1 or -2 or animal biosafety level (ABSL)-1 or -2 must meet the following 
requirements as applicable: 
a. 42 CFR § 73, Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists of agents and toxins 
regulated by HHS/CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the 
Department of Health and Human Services): 1) HHS Select Agents and Toxins 
(42 CFR § 73.3); and 2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (42 CFR § 73.4). 
b. 7 CFR § 331, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, contains 
a list of Plant Protection and Quarantine (PPQ) Programs of the Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Select Agents and Toxins (7 CFR § 
331.3(b)). 
c.  9 CFR § 121, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists: 
1) Veterinary Services Programs (VS) of the APHIS, Select Agents and Toxins( 9 
CFR § 121.3(b)); and 2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (9 CFR § 121.4(b)) 
.For more information, see DOE G 151.1-5, Biosafety Facilities Emergency 
Management Guide, current version. 
3. CATEGORY III SNM. PL-7 assets identified as Category III SNM must meet the 
following requirements: 
a. SNM must be used or processed within at least a LA in accordance with security 
procedures documented in a Security Plan (SP).

--- page 54 ---
Attachment 3, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 3-I-2 8-30-2021
b. Protect with barriers designed to mitigate the DBT adversary's capabilities.
c. SNM must be stored within a locked security container or room, either of which 
must be located within at least a LA in accordance with security procedures 
documented in a SP.
(1) The container or room must be protected by IDS in accordance with 
Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order or by protective force (PF) patrol 
physical check at least every eight hours.
(2) The container or room must be secured with Level II locks.
d. Control access with PACS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1 of this 
Order or equivalent means and documented in an approved SP.
e. Category III quantities of SNM may be transported by the following methods 
unless otherwise prohibited by statute (see DOE O 460.2, Departmental Materials 
Transportation and Packaging Management, current version).
(1) Classified nuclear explosive parts, components, special assemblies, sub 
critical test devices, trainers or shapes containing no fissile nuclear material 
or less than Category II quantities of fissile nuclear material must be 
shipped consistent with both DOE policy governing protection of classified 
matter and Department of Transportation regulations governing interstate 
transportation.
(2) Domestic offsite shipments of classified configurations of Category III 
quantities of SNM must be made by OST or by an OST approved 
commercial carrier that meets the requirements listed below in (3).
(3) Offsite shipments of unclassified configurations of Category III quantities 
of SNM are not required to be made by OST. If OST is not used, the 
shipments may be made by the following means:
(a) Government owned or exclusive use truck, commercial carrier, or 
rail may be used.
1 Transport vehicles must be inspected by authorized  
personnel before loading and shipment. 
2 Cargo compartments must be locked and sealed after the 
inspection and remain sealed while en route. 
3 S hipment escorts must periodically communicate with a 
control station operator.

--- page 55 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 3, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 3-I-3 
 
 
4 The control station operator must be capable of requesting 
appropriate local law enforcement agency (LLEA) response 
if needed. 
(b) Air shipments must be under the direct observation of the 
authorized escorts during all land movements and loading and 
unloading operations. 
(4) Requirements for movement between security areas at the same site must 
be developed and documented in the approved SP. 
4. CATEGORY IV SNM. PL-7 assets identified as Category IV SNM must meet the 
following requirements: 
a. SNM must be stored, used or processed within at least a PPA in accordance with 
security procedures documented in a SP. 
b. Protect with barriers designed to mitigate the DBT adversary's capabilities. 
c. Secure with Level III locks and keys, including while in transit. 
d. Control access either utilizing PACS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1 
of this Order, or Level III locks and keys. 
e. Category IV quantities of SNM may be transported by the following methods 
unless otherwise prohibited by statute: 
(1) Domestic offsite shipments of classified configurations of Category IV 
quantities of SNM may be made by the OST or by other means when 
approved by DOE line management or ODFSA. 
(2) Shippers are required to give the consignee an estimated time of arrival 
before dispatch and to follow up with a written confirmation not later than 
48 hours after dispatch. 
(3) Consignees must promptly notify the shipper by telephone and written 
confirmation upon determination that a shipment has not arrived by the 
scheduled time. 
(4) Shipments must be made by a mode of transportation that can be traced, 
and within 24 hours from request, the carrier be capable of reporting the 
last known location of the shipment should it fail to arrive on schedule. 
5. OTHER ACCOUNTABLE NUCLEAR MATERIAL. PL-7 assets identified as Other 
Accountable Nuclear Material as referenced by the DBT and defined by DOE O 474.2, 
Nuclear Material Control and Accountability, current version, must be protected in 
accordance with local security procedures documented in a SP, based on analysis:

--- page 56 ---
Attachment 3, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 3-I-4 8-30-2021 
 
6. RADIOLOGICAL MATERIALS. Protection of PL-7 assets identified as radiological 
materials as defined by the DBT (Appendix A, 2.g.5) must be protected in accordance 
with local security procedures documented in a SP, based on analysis: 
7. CHEMICALS. PL-7 assets identified as chemical assets as defined by the DBT 
(Appendix A 2.g.6) must be protected in accordance with local security procedures 
documented in a SP, based on analysis. 
8. GOVERNMENT PROPERTY AND FACILITIES. PL-7 assets identified as Government 
property and facilities must be protected in accordance with the applicable requirements 
in this Order. 
9. CLASSIFIED OR CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION (CUI).  
a. PL-7 assets identified as classified matter must be protected with Level I locks 
and meet the requirements of DOE O 471.6, Information Security, current 
version, and Attachment 3 of this Order. 
b. PL-7 assets identified as CUI within the Department consists of: 
(1) Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information (UCNI) which, must be 
protected in accordance with 10 CFR 1017 Subpart E, Physical Protection 
Requirements, and DOE O 471.1, Identification and Protection of 
Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information (UCNI), current version. 
(2) Official Use Only (OUO), which encompasses Personally Identifiable 
Information (PII) and other unclassified sensitive information not 
governed by specific directives. OUO must be protected in accordance 
with DOE O 471.3, Identification and Protecting of Official Use Only 
Information, current version. It will be subject to the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. 552, and applicable exemptions may 
apply if requested.

--- page 57 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 3, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 3-II-1 (and 3-II-2) 
 
 
CHAPTER II.  PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-8 ASSETS 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. PL-8 assets are defined in the DBT as Departmental 
Federal employees, contractors, and the general public on Departmental property. This 
also includes childcare centers physically located on Departmental property, visitor 
centers, and government leased properties.  
a. The protection strategy of PL-8 assets is order compliance.  
b. When planning protection measures for workplace violence and active shooter 
events, the adversary characteristics, capabilities and scenarios described in the 
DBT for PL-8 must be used. 
c. Protection measures may be implemented using Departmental or non-
Departmental resources (e.g., local law enforcement, commercial alarm 
monitoring, local fire department, and hazard material response). Additional 
measures may be applied based on local analyses.

--- page 58 ---


--- page 59 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 4-1 (and 4-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 4. PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-5 AND PL-6 ASSETS 
The intent of this Attachment is to provide the baseline physical protection requirements for PL-
5 and PL-6 assets. These requirements are in addition to those physical protection requirements 
outlined in Attachment 2 of this Order.

--- page 60 ---


--- page 61 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 4, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 4-I-1 
 
 
CHAPTER I.  PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-5 ASSETS 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. PL-5 assets are assets designated as part of the United 
States National Critical Infrastructure as defined in Presidential Policy Directive-21, 
Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience. PL-5 assets also include facilities with 
significant radiological, chemical, or biological sabotage targets, and have off-site 
consequences. 
a. Protection measures must be designed to mitigate the adversary scenarios and 
capabilities for PL-5 described within the DBT.  
b. An SRA is required for PL-5 assets. Additional requirements may be established 
by the Program Secretarial Office or Power Marketing Administration (PMA) as 
determined by the results of the SRA. 
c. The protection strategy objective for PL-5 assets is order compliance. The four 
elements below must be addressed in the SP or in the analyses that support the 
SP: 
(1) Protection; 
(2) Mitigation; 
(3) Incident Response; and 
(4) Mission Recovery. 
d. Boundaries must be defined by physical barriers (fences, buildings, rooms, 
containment structures, etc.) encompassing the designated space containing the 
asset with access controls to ensure that only authorized personnel are allowed to 
enter the area containing the asset. 
e. Intra-site transportation procedures must be covered in the SP. 
2. NATIONAL CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE. PL-5 assets designated as national 
critical infrastructure as defined in the DBT must meet the following requirements: 
a. Deter cyber sabotage by preventing unauthorized on-site or remote access to 
critical process controls.  
b. Deter insider sabotage which would result in a release of chemicals offsite by 
employing measures established by the ODSA and documented in a SP approved 
by the ODFSA. 
c. Control access to the asset by either utilizing PACS in accordance with 
Attachment 6, Chapter 1 of this Order, or through the use of Level I locks and 
keys.

--- page 62 ---
Attachment 4, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 4-I-2 8-30-2021 
 
d. Protect vehicle avenues of approach with barriers designed to mitigate the DBT 
adversary's capabilities based on the results of the SRA. 
e. Monitor with IDS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order, or 
monitor using authorized personnel.  
f. Ensure that site security participates in coordinating an emergency response that 
supports a documented Emergency Management program that provides a 
foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, and readiness 
assurance to respond to/recover from incidents involving these assets. 
3. RADIOLOGICAL MATERIALS. PL-5 assets identified as radiological or nuclear 
materials defined in the DBT must meet the following requirements: 
a. Control access to the asset either utilizing PACS in accordance with Attachment 
6, Chapter 1 of this Order, or through the use of Level I locks and keys. 
b. Deter insider sabotage which would result in a release of chemicals offsite by 
employing measures established by the ODSA and documented in a SP approved 
by the ODFSA  
c. Protect with barriers designed to mitigate the DBT adversary's capabilities, as 
required, based on the results of the SRA.  
d. Monitor via IDS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order, or 
monitor using authorized personnel. 
e. Ensure that site security participates in coordinating an emergency response that 
supports a documented Emergency Management program that provides a 
foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, and readiness 
assurance to respond to/recover from incidents involving these assets. 
4. BIOLOGICAL AGENTS AND SELECT AGENTS AND TOXINS. PL-5 assets 
identified as biological agents and select agents and toxins as defined by the DBT must 
meet the requirements contained in the following national and departmental policies: 
a. 42 CFR § 73, Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists of agents and toxins 
regulated by HHS/CDC: 1) HHS Select Agents and Toxins (42 CFR § 73.3); 
and 2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (42 CFR § 73.4). 
b. 7 CFR § 331, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, 
contains a list of Plant Protection and Quarantine Programs (PPQ) of the Animal 
and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Select Agents and Toxins 
(7 CFR § 331.3(b)). 
c.  9 CFR § 121, , Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists: 
1) Veterinary Services Programs (VS) of the APHIS, Select Agents and Toxins 
(9 CFR § 121.3(b)); and 2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (9 CFR § 121.4(b)).

--- page 63 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 4, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 4-I-3 
 
 
d. DOE Policy 434.1, Conduct and Approval of Select Agent and Toxin Work at 
DOE Sites, current version. 
e. For more information, see CDC guidance from Biosafety in Microbiological and 
Biomedical Laboratories and DOE Guide 151.1-5, Biosafety Facilities, current 
version.  
f. Ensure that site security participates in coordinating an emergency response that 
supports a documented Emergency Management program that provides a 
foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, and readiness 
assurance to respond to/recover from incidents involving these assets. 
5. CHEMICALS. Chemicals with PL-5 consequences must be protected in accordance with 
the requirements below and as required based on the results of an SRA. Chemicals 
typically found on DOE facilities are identified here: 
https://edms.energy.gov/pac/TeelDocs. 
PL-5 assets identified as chemical assets as defined by the DBT must be protected 
by/contained within areas meeting the following requirements: 
a. A boundary must be established to protect the asset. 
b. The boundary must be defined by physical barriers that may include fences, 
buildings, rooms, or other barriers that surround the asset.  
c. A means of intrusion detection and surveillance must be provided for protection 
of the asset. The level of intrusion detection and surveillance must be based on the 
results of the SRA for the asset. 
d. Deter vehicles from penetrating the perimeter of the area where the asset is stored, 
gaining unauthorized access or otherwise presenting a hazard to potentially 
critical targets.  
e. Be stored in a location that is secured with Level I locks. 
f. Approved procedures must be in place to monitor the shipping, receipt, and 
storage of hazardous materials within the facility.  
g. Deter insider sabotage that would result in a release of chemicals offsite by 
employing measures established by the ODSA and documented in a SP approved 
by the ODFSA including: 
(1) Limit access to authorized individuals,  
(2) Provide access control by using PACS in accordance with Attachment 
6, Chapter I, or authorized personnel,  
(3) Control visitor access as documented in the approved SP,

--- page 64 ---
Attachment 4, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 4-I-4 8-30-2021 
 
(4) Provide tamper-resistant storage of the chemical.  
h. Deter cyber sabotage by preventing unauthorized on-site or remote access to 
critical process controls.  
i. Maintain effective monitoring, communications, and warning systems. 
j. Ensure proper security training of facility personnel is specific to the assets being 
protected.

--- page 65 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 4, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 4-II-1 
 
 
CHAPTER II.  PHYSICAL PROTECTION FOR PL-6 ASSETS 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. PL-6 assets are assets designated as critical program 
assets or facilities; radiological, chemical, or biological materials; or assets determined to 
be sabotage targets with on-site consequences as defined in the DBT. 
a. Protection measures must be designed to mitigate the adversary scenarios and 
capabilities for PL-6 described within the DBT.  
b. An SRA is required for PL-6 assets. Additional requirements may be established 
by the Program Secretarial Office or PMA as determined by the results of the SRA. 
c. The protection strategy objective for PL-6 assets is order compliance. The four 
elements below must be addressed in the SP or in the analyses that support the SP: 
(1) Protection; 
(2) Mitigation; 
(3) Incident Response; and 
(4) Mission Recovery. 
d. Boundaries must be defined by physical barriers (fences, buildings, rooms, 
containment structures, etc.) encompassing the designated space containing the 
asset with access controls to ensure that only authorized personnel are allowed to 
enter the area containing the asset. 
e. Intra-site transportation procedures must be covered in the SP. 
2. CRITICAL PROGRAM ASSETS. PL-6 assets designated as critical program assets as 
defined in the DBT must meet the following requirements: 
a. Control access either utilizing PACS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1 
of this Order, or Level II locks and keys. 
b. Monitor with IDS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order, or 
monitor using authorized personnel based on the results of an SRA. 
c. Deter cyber sabotage by preventing unauthorized on-site or remote access to 
critical process controls.  
d. Ensure that site security participates in coordinating an emergency response that 
supports a documented Emergency Management program that provides a 
foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, and readiness assurance 
to respond to/recover from incidents involving these assets.

--- page 66 ---
Attachment 4, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 4-II-2 8-30-2021 
 
e. Deter insider sabotage would result in sabotage of critical program assets by 
employing measures established by the ODFSA and documented in a SP. 
3. RADIOLOGICAL MATERIALS. PL-6 assets identified as radiological or nuclear 
materials defined in the DBT must meet the following requirements: 
a. Protect with barriers designed to mitigate the DBT adversary's capabilities based 
on the results of an SRA. 
b. Control access either utilizing PACS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1 
of this Order, or Level II locks and keys. 
c. Monitor via IDS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter II of this Order, or 
monitor using authorized personnel. 
d. Ensure that site security participates in coordinating an emergency response that 
supports a documented Emergency Management program that provides a 
foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, and readiness assurance 
to respond to/recover from incidents involving these assets. 
e. Intra-site transportation procedures must be covered in the SP. 
4. BIOLOGICAL AGENTS. PL-6 assets identified as Biological agents as defined by the 
DBT must meet the requirements contained in the following national policies: 
a. 42 CFR § 73, Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists of agents and toxins 
regulated by HHS/CDC: 1) HHS Select Agents and Toxins (42 CFR § 73.3); and 
2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (42 CFR § 73.4). 
b. 7 CFR § 331, Possession, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, contains 
a list of Plant Protection and Quarantine Programs (PPQ) of the Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Select Agents and Toxins (7 CFR § 331.3(b)). 
c. 9 CFR § 121, Use, and Transfer of Select Agents and Toxins, contains two lists: 1) 
Veterinary Services Programs (VS) of the APHIS, Select Agents and Toxins( 9 
CFR § 121.3(b)); and 2) Overlap Select Agents and Toxins (9 CFR § 121.4(b)) 
d. DOE Policy 434.1, Conduct and Approval of Select Agent and Toxin Work at DOE 
Sites, current version. 
e. For more information see CDC guidance from Biosafety in Microbiological and 
Biomedical Laboratories and DOE Guide 151.1-5, Biosafety Facilities, current 
version.  
Ensure that the site has established a documented Emergency Management 
program that provides a foundation for planning, preparedness, response, recovery, 
and readiness assurance to respond to/recover from incidents involving these 
assets.

--- page 67 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 4, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 4-II-3 
 
 
5. CHEMICALS. Chemicals with PL-6 consequences must be protected in accordance with 
the requirements below and as required based on the results of an SRA. Chemicals 
typically found on DOE facilities are identified here: 
https://edms.energy.gov/pac/TeelDocs. 
a. Monitor with IDS or authorized personnel. 
b. Control access either utilizing PACS in accordance with Attachment 6, Chapter 1 
of this Order, or Level II locks and keys. 
c. Deter vehicles from gaining unauthorized access to the asset.  
d. Secure and monitor the shipping, receipt, and storage of hazardous materials for 
the facility.  
e. Deter insider sabotage which would result in a release of chemicals onsite by 
employing measures established by the ODSA and documented in an approved 
SP. 
f. Deter cyber sabotage by preventing unauthorized on-site or remote access to 
critical process controls.  
g. Maintain effective monitoring, communications, and warning systems. 
h. Ensure proper security training of facility personnel specific to the assets being 
protected.

--- page 68 ---


--- page 69 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-1 (and Page 5-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 5. PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF PL 1-4 ASSETS 
The intent of this Attachment is to prescribe the physical protection requirements for PL-1 
through PL-4 assets. These requirements are in addition to those physical protection 
requirements outlined in Attachments 2 and 6.

--- page 70 ---


--- page 71 ---
OE O 473.1A Attachment 5, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-I 1 
 
 
CHAPTER I.  PROTECTION OF PL-1 THROUGH PL-4 ASSETS 
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for physical protection of PL-1 through 
PL-4 assets consistent with the DBT.  
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. The requirements cited in this Chapter apply to fixed 
facilities and not the conduct of onsite movement of SNM or operations managed by 
OST.  
a. Protection of PL-1 through PL-4 assets must be based on the results of a 
vulnerability analysis (VA) as required by DOE O 470.3, Design Basis Threat, 
current version. 
b. Roll-up is the accumulation of lower categories of SNM to attain a higher 
Category of SNM. SNM must be protected at the higher level when roll up to 
Category I or II quantities can occur on site unless the facility has conducted an 
analysis that determined roll up is not credible.  
c. Protection measures must be designed to prevent malevolent acts and to respond 
to adverse conditions such as emergencies caused by acts of nature. 
(1) An integrated system of protection measures must be developed, 
documented, and implemented to protect PL-1 through PL-4 assets. 
(2) Protection measures must address physical protection strategy (i.e., denial 
or containment) as well as recapture, recovery, and/or pursuit by an armed 
PF.  
d. A facility must not possess, receive, process, transport, or store nuclear weapons 
or SNM until that facility has been issued a facility clearance. (see 
DOE O 470.4B, Appendix B, Section 1). 
2. FACILITIES WITH PL-1 THROUGH PL-3 ASSETS. PL-1 through PL-3 assets must be 
located within a Material Access Area (MAA).  
a. Any MAA containing unattended (not in use/processing) PL-1 through PL-3 
assets must be equipped with an IDS, or detection must be provided by the PF.  
b. PL-1 assets must be stored in a vault within an MAA. Storage facilities 
constructed after July 15, 1994, must be built below grade i.e., underground. 
c. PL-2 assets must be stored in a vault within an MAA; however, certain 
operational activities may dictate other storage configurations. These storage 
configurations must be supported by a VA and approved by the appropriate 
Federal risk acceptance official. 
d. PL-3 assets must be stored in a vault or VTR within an MAA.

--- page 72 ---
Attachment 5, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 5-I-2 8-30-2021 
 
3. FACILITIES WITH PL-4 ASSETS. 
a. PL-4 assets must be located, at a minimum, within a Protected Area (PA). 
b. PL-4 assets must be stored in a vault or VTR within a PA; however, certain 
operational activities may dictate other storage configurations. These storage 
configurations must be supported by a VA and approved by the appropriate Federal 
risk acceptance official. 
4. PROTECTED AREAS (PAs).PAs are security areas designed to protect PL-1 through PL-
4 assets by providing concentric layers of security.  
a. PAs must be surrounded by a perimeter intrusion detection and assessment system 
(PIDAS) (see Attachment 6, Chapter II). 
b. PAs must be designed to facilitate assessment. 
c. PA entrances (e.g., gates in fences, doors in buildings) must be secured using Level 
I locks when not under observation by PF. 
d. PAs must be designed to mitigate the VBIED threat, as identified in the DBT. 
e. PA access control systems must ensure only authorized personnel are allowed to 
enter and exit (see Attachment 6, Chapter I). 
(1) Unescorted access must be limited to individuals with an appropriate access 
authorization and for the conduct of official duties. 
(2) Individuals without an appropriate access authorization must be escorted. 
(a) The ODSA must establish escort to visitor ratios for the PA and 
document in an approved Security Plan (SP). 
(b) Escort responsibilities must be documented in the approved SP. 
(c) Escorts must acknowledge understanding of escort responsibilities. 
(d) The escort must ensure measures are taken to prevent compromise 
of classified matter or access to SNM. 
(e) Visitors to PAs must be documented in a log or PACS. 
(f) Information from visitor logs must be retained in accordance with 
local records management procedures. 
(3) Automated access control at PAs must have anti-passback protection.

--- page 73 ---
OE O 473.1A Attachment 5, Chapter I – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-I 3 (and 5-I-4) 
 
 
f. An inspection program must be developed by the ODSA in accordance with the 
requirements cited in Chapter II of this Attachment and documented in the 
approved SP.  
g. Vehicles authorized by the ODSA in accordance with local procedures may be 
admitted as operationally required.  
5. MATERIAL ACCESS AREAS. In addition to requirements for a PA the following apply 
to an MAA: 
a. Multiple MAAs may exist within a single PA. MAAs must be located wholly 
within a PA with no common boundary. 
b.  MAAs must have barriers that provide sufficient delay to facilitate a timely 
response, as informed by the results of a vulnerability analysis. 
c. While an MAA is required for the protection of Category I quantities of SNM, 
classified matter may exist within an MAA. In such instances, the classified matter 
must be stored according to the requirements in DOE O 471.6, Information 
Security, current version. 
d. An inspection program must be developed in accordance with the requirements 
cited in Chapter II of this Attachment. 
e. Access control must be administered by armed PF personnel and/or automated 
physical access control systems. 
(1) Automated access control at MAAs must have anti-passback protection. 
(2) MAA entrances must be secured using Level I locks when not under 
observation by PF. 
(3) Access must be controlled to limit entry to individuals with an appropriate 
access authorization and who have been authorized for entry in accordance 
with local procedures. 
(4) Individuals without appropriate access authorization must be escorted. 
(a) The ODSA must establish escort to visitor ratios for the MAA and 
document in an approved SP. 
(b) Escort responsibilities must be documented in the approved SP. 
(c) Escorts must acknowledge understanding of escort responsibilities. 
(d) The escort must ensure measures are taken to prevent compromise 
of classified matter or access to SNM. 
(e) Visitors to MAAs must be documented in a log or PACS.

--- page 74 ---


--- page 75 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 5, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-II-1 
 
 
CHAPTER II.  INSPECTION PROGRAMS 
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for inspection programs utilized at PA and 
MAA boundaries.  
1. GENERAL. These programs are also intended to protect Department assets and interests 
from unauthorized removal. An entry/exit inspection program must be documented in an 
SP.  
a. An inspection program must be established and documented in an approved SP 
to detect prohibited and controlled articles before being brought into DOE 
facilities and prevent the unauthorized removal of Departmental assets. 
b. Passage of individuals, vehicles, and/or packages or mail through entry control 
point inspection equipment must be observed and controlled by trained 
designated personnel.  
c. Inspection equipment must be used for PAs and MAAs such as x-ray machines, 
metal detectors, and SNM detectors. 
(1) Uninterruptable power supplies must be provided to all inspection 
equipment. In those instances where uninterrupted power is not practical, 
there must be locally developed procedures to provide alternative 
measures for conducting entry/exit screening when loss of electrical power 
occurs. 
(2) The testing and configuration of inspection equipment must be 
documented in the SP approved by the ODFSA. 
d. Entry/exit control points.  
(1) Entry control points must allow the entry and exit of authorized personnel 
while detecting prohibited and controlled articles. 
(2) Entry control point configuration must allow for the inspection of 
personnel, packages, and hand carried items. 
(3) Entry/exit point inspection operations and equipment must be collocated 
with designated permanent PF posts to facilitate the initiation of a timely 
response to a security event. 
(4) Permanent PF posts must be designed with an unobstructed view to 
facilitate observation of any attempt to bypass systems. 
(5) Entry/exit points must be alarmed with intrusion detection sensors when 
not in use or controlled at all times.

--- page 76 ---
Attachment 5, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 5-II-2  8-30-2021 
 
(6) Entry/exit points must be designed to preclude commingling of 
searched and unsearched personnel. 
2. ENTRY/EXIT SCREENING EQUIPMENT. 
a. Explosives Detection. 
(1) Sites must analyze PA and MAA access points to determine whether 
vulnerability exists for an adversary to use explosives to affect 
consequences of DOE assets. 
(2) Sites must implement protective measures to mitigate the risk of the DBT 
adversary threat.  
(3) These protective measures must be supported by a VA and be included in 
the overall protection planning process. 
(4) If the analysis determines that explosive detection is required, explosive 
detection measures must ensure that explosives are not introduced without 
appropriate authorization as described in Attachment 2, Chapter III.  
(5) The SP or procedure must document the analysis that establishes a 
facility's capability to detect explosives and provide protection against the 
malicious use of explosives. 
(6) Documentation must include the rationale for explosive detection 
measures selection, deployment, and use. 
(7) Security procedures for explosive detection measures must be documented 
in the SP approved by the ODFSA. 
b. Metal Detection.  
(1) Metal detectors must ensure weapons are not introduced without 
authorization. (For details on testing and maintenance see Attachment 6, 
Chapter IV paragraph 3.c.). 
(2) Security procedures for metal detection equipment must be documented in 
site specific procedure(s) or the approved SP.  
c. X-ray Machines.  
(1) X-ray machines may be used to supplement metal detectors and protective 
personnel hand searches for prohibited and controlled articles. (For details 
on testing and maintenance see Attachment 6, Chapter IV paragraph 3.d.). 
(2) X-ray machines must provide a discernible image of the prohibited and 
controlled article.

--- page 77 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 5, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-II-3 
 
 
(3) Security procedures for X-ray machines must be documented in site 
specific procedure(s) or the approved SP.  
d. SNM Detectors.  
(1) SNM detectors must be configured to ensure SNM is not removed without 
authorization. Detection thresholds must be consistent with the SNM type, 
form, quantity, attractiveness level, size, configuration, portability, and 
credible diversion amounts of the articles or property contained within the 
area. 
(2) SNM detectors used in the inspection process must be tested using 
materials with radioactive signatures and strengths consistent with 
required detection thresholds that depict the type of SNM located within 
the security area. 
(3) Security procedures for SNM detection equipment must be documented in 
site specific procedure(s) or the approved SP.  
3. ENTRY SCREENING. Entrance inspections of personnel, vehicles, packages, and hand 
carried items must be performed to deter and detect prohibited and controlled articles.  
a. Bypass routes around inspection equipment must be closed or monitored to deter 
unauthorized passage of personnel, prohibited and controlled articles. 
b. Measures must be taken to preclude the unauthorized alteration of control settings 
on all entry/exit control point inspection equipment. 
c. Equipment, excluding x-ray machines, must have audible and visual alarms 
monitored by trained personnel. 
d. Measures must be taken to prohibit the commingling of screened individuals from 
unscreened individuals during the entry screening process. 
4. EXIT SCREENING. 
a. Personnel, vehicles, and hand carried items including packages, briefcases, 
purses, and lunch containers are to be inspected to deter and detect unauthorized 
removal of SNM, classified matter, or other S&S interests from designated 
security areas.  
b. Items to be detected during vehicle screening must be determined by site analysis. 
c. Exit inspection procedures must be written to ensure: 
(1) SNM and Metal Detectors must be co-located with PF to assist in 
detection of attempted shielding and/or diversions of SNM.

--- page 78 ---
Attachment 5, Chapter II – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 473.1A 
Page 5-II-4  8-30-2021 
 
(2) SNM detectors and metal detectors must be used in a combination that 
precludes the opportunity to defeat the detectors (e.g., the placement of the 
metal detector ahead of the SNM detector to prevent use of metal 
shielding to remove SNM). 
(3) Metal detectors, SNM detectors, and x-ray machines used in the exit 
inspection process must ensure shielded SNM is not removed without 
authorization. 
(4) Specific inspection procedures and response to alarms with limitations and 
thresholds for the various detectors must be established and documented in 
the SP or procedure. 
(5) The identification of detection thresholds for the various specified threats 
and shielding must be consistent with the type, form, quantity, 
attractiveness level, size, configuration, portability, and credible diversion 
amounts of material contained within the area. 
5. EMERGENCY PERSONNEL AND VEHICLES. Emergency personnel and vehicles, 
whether onsite or offsite responders, may be authorized for immediate entry to security 
areas in response to a verified emergency if:  
a. The PF or other designated site personnel maintain continuous surveillance of all 
emergency vehicles that enter the site. 
b. Arrangements are made to inspect emergency personnel and vehicles when 
exiting after the emergency is over or when leaving the site.  
(1) If the emergency condition prevents an exit inspection before departing 
the site, an escort must be provided as required in site specific procedures 
or the approved SP.  
(2) Both personnel and emergency vehicles must be inspected as soon as the 
emergency is over.

--- page 79 ---
DOE O 473.1A Attachment 5, Chapter III – Federal Employees and Contractors 
8-30-2021 Page 5-III-1 (and 5-III-2) 
 
 
CHAPTER III.  SECURE STORAGE 
The intent of this Chapter is to establish requirements for SNM vaults. 
1. GENERAL.  
a. A Special Nuclear Material (SNM) Vault must:  
(1) Be a penetration resistant enclosure that has doors, walls, floor, and 
roof/ceiling; 
(2) Designed and constructed to delay penetration from forced entry; and 
(3) Equipped with IDS devices on openings that may allow access.  
b. The material thickness must be determined by the requirement for forcible entry 
delay times for the Safeguards and Security (S&S) interests stored within but 
must not be less than the delay time provided by a minimum 20.32 centimeters (8 
inch) thick reinforced concrete poured in place with a 28-day compressive 
strength of 17,237 kilopascal (2,500 pounds per square inch).  
c. Activated technologies such as active barriers or passive/active denial systems 
may be used when analysis indicates that longer delay times are required.  
d. The site's analysis of the protection measures in use must be documented in the 
SP. 
e. The vault door and frame must meet the GSA's highest level of penetration 
resistance. The lock on the door must be a Level I lock that meets the 
requirements of Attachment 2, Chapter V.  
f. Certain operational activities may dictate other storage configurations. These 
storage configurations must be supported by a VA and approved by the 
appropriate Federal risk acceptance official.

--- page 80 ---

