--- page 1 ---
U.S. Department of Energy	 ORDER 
Washington, DC DOE O 475.2B 
Approved: 10-3-2014 
SUBJECT: IDENTIFYING CLASSIFIED INFORMATION 
1.	 PURPOSE. To establish the program to identify information classified under the Atomic 
Energy Act [Restricted Data (RD), Formerly Restricted Data (FRD), and Transclassified 
Foreign Nuclear Information (TFNI)] or Executive Order (E.O.) 13526 [National 
Security Information (NSI)], so that it can be protected against unauthorized 
dissemination. 
2.	 CANCELLATION. DOE O 475.2A, Identifying Classified Information, dated 2-1-11. 
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements. 
3.	 APPLICABILITY. 
a.	 Departmental Applicability. This Order applies to all Departmental elements that 
may generate classified information, documents, or material. 
(1)	 The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) will assure that NNSA employees and contractors comply with 
their respective responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this Order 
will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority 
under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
(2)	 The Bonneville Power Administrator (BPA) will assure that BPA 
employees and contractors comply with their respective responsibilities 
under this directive consistent with BPA's procurement and self-financing 
authorities. 
(3)	 The Director, Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (IN), will 
assure that IN employees, contractors, and NT-50 users comply with their 
respective responsibilities under this Order. Nothing in this Order will be 
construed to interfere with requirements outlined in Intelligence 
Community (IC) Directives (ICDs) and other ICDs and IC Policy 
Guidance (ICPG) concerning the classification and security of IC 
information and documents pursuant to Executive Order 12333. 
b.	 DOE Contractors. Except for the equivalency in paragraph 3.c.(3), the CRD 
(Attachment 1) sets forth requirements of this Order that will apply to contracts 
that include the CRD. The CRD must be included in contracts that may generate 
classified information, documents, or material. 
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT:	 INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov	 Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
c.	 Equivalencies/Exemptions for this Order. 
(1)	 Requests for equivalencies/exemptions to this Order from DOE (not 
including NNSA) are granted by the Director, Office of Classification. 
Requests from NNSA are granted by the NNSA Classification Officer, in 
consultation with the Director, Office of Classification. 
(2)	 Requests must be submitted in writing by heads of Headquarters elements 
or managers of field elements and must: 
(a)	 Identify the Order requirement for which the equivalency or 
exemption is being requested; 
(b)	 Explain why the equivalency or exemption is needed; and 
(c)	 If requesting an equivalency, describe the alternate measures for 
addressing the requirement. 
(3)	 Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by E.O. 12344, codified at 50 USC sections 2406 and 2511 and 
to ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors 
(Director) will implement and oversee requirements and practices 
pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director's cognizance, 
as deemed appropriate. 
4.	 REQUIREMENTS. 
a.	 Each Headquarters and field element that generates classified information, 
documents, or material must maintain a classification program that ensures the 
identification of classified information through the accurate and accountable 
application of classification standards. 
b.	 Each Headquarters element that oversees subordinate field elements or 
subordinate contractors that generate classified information, documents, or 
material must have a Program Classification Officer. The Program Classification 
Officer will also serve as the Headquarters Classification Representative for his or 
her element. The position of Program Classification Officer may be filled by a 
person from outside the element who meets the qualifications for the position. 
c.	 Each Headquarters element that has Federal or contractor employees who 
generate classified information, documents, or material must have a Headquarters 
Classification Representative if they do not have a Program Classification Officer. 
The position of Headquarters Classification Representative may be filled by a 
Program Classification Officer or Headquarters Classification Representative 
from outside the element. Alternate Headquarters Classification Representatives 
may be appointed in accordance with Attachment 2, Appointment of 
Classification Officials.

--- page 3 ---
3 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
d.	 Each field element that generates classified information, documents, or material 
or oversees one or more contractors who generate classified information, 
documents, or material must have a Classification Officer. This requirement may 
be fulfilled by a Classification Officer within the field element or from outside the 
field element. 
e.	 Documents and material must be reviewed, classified, declassified, downgraded, and 
upgraded as specified in Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
f.	 Classified information contained in documents or material must be correctly 
identified, basing such determinations on current classification guidance 
developed in accordance with Attachment 3, Classification Guidance, or source 
documents as permitted by paragraph 1.b. of Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. Appropriate classification 
and declassification markings must be placed on the documents or material in 
accordance with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
g.	 Information, documents, and material must be classified, declassified, 
downgraded, or upgraded only by individuals with appropriate authorities in 
accordance with Attachment 2, Appointment of Classification Officials. 
h.	 Classification officials with appropriate authority who misclassify documents or 
material must not face penalties as long as such determinations are within their 
authority and are based on reasonable interpretations of guidance. 
i.	 Classification guidance must be identified or the use of source documents must be 
approved for all DOE or non-DOE-funded work performed in a classified subject 
area that may generate derivatively classified documents or material. The guidance 
must satisfy the requirements of Attachment 3, Classification Guidance, or 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
j.	 Classification officials must be provided with current and appropriate classification 
guidance. 
k.	 Classification challenges and declassification proposals must be processed in 
accordance with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
l.	 Each Headquarters and field element classification program must be periodically 
evaluated as described in Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
m.	 Training programs must be conducted in accordance with Attachment 6, 
Classification Education Program, to ensure that employees serving as classification 
officials are competent to perform their classification-related responsibilities.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
n.	 Employees with authorized access to classified information must receive a 
classification awareness briefing when they are first authorized access and 
annually thereafter that, at a minimum, covers the information in Attachment 6, 
Classification Education Program, paragraph 1.b. 
o.	 Classified information in documents requested under statute or Executive order 
must be identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in accordance with 
Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act and Mandatory 
Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, Bracketing and 
Redaction Procedures. 
5.	 RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a.	 Deputy Secretary. 
(1)	 Resolves all disagreements submitted by the NNSA Administrator 
concerning final determinations made by the Office of Environment, 
Health, Safety and Security involving information under NNSA’s 
cognizance. 
(2)	 Performs duties of 5b, as necessary. 
b. Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security. 
(1)	 Establishes classification program requirements under the Atomic Energy 
Act and E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information. 
(2)	 Serves as the Senior Agency Official for DOE under E.O. 13526. 
(3)	 Determines when RD may be transclassified to FRD or TFNI. 
(4)	 Determines when RD and TFNI may be declassified and, in coordination 
with the Department of Defense, when FRD may be declassified. 
(5)	 Ensures the Department’s compliance with E.O. 13526 and Title 10 Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1045, Nuclear Classification and 
Declassification, through on-site classification program evaluations. 
(6)	 Concurs on the classification of an unmarked document found to contain 
classified information after the public requests the document under statute 
or Executive order. 
(7)	 Makes the final appeal determination concerning the denial of any RD, 
FRD, or TFNI contained in a document requested under the Freedom of 
Information Act or the mandatory declassification review provisions of 10 
CFR § 1045.42, coordinating with the NNSA Chief of Defense Nuclear 
Security for information under NNSA cognizance.

--- page 5 ---
5 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(8)	 Makes the final internal appeal determination concerning the denial of any 
NSI contained in a document requested under the Freedom of Information 
Act or the mandatory declassification review provisions of E.O. 13526 for 
NSI. Ensures that the challenger is informed of his or her right to appeal 
to the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel (ISCAP). 
(9)	 Makes the final appeal determination concerning any formal classification 
challenges for RD, FRD, and TFNI. 
(10)	 Makes the final internal appeal determination for any formal classification 
challenges for NSI and ensures that the challenger is informed of his or 
her right to appeal to the ISCAP. 
(11)	 Appoints Secret and Confidential Original Classifiers for DOE (not 
including NNSA). Coordinates with NNSA on Secret and Confidential 
original classification delegations, when necessary. 
(12)	 Reports delegations of original classification authority to the Information 
Security Oversight Office (ISOO) annually. 
c.	 Director, Office of Classification. 
(1)	 Serves as the DOE Restricted Data Management Official under 
10 CFR § 1045.33. 
(2)	 Develops, issues, and interprets policies and procedures to implement 
DOE’s classification program under the Atomic Energy Act, 10 CFR part 
1045, E.O. 13526, and 32 CFR part 2001. 
(3)	 Implements the DOE classification program. 
(4)	 Downgrades or upgrades the classification level of RD or FRD 
information with the concurrence of the Program Office with cognizance 
over the information. 
(5)	 Coordinates activities for which NNSA has cognizance over the 
information with the NNSA Chief of Defense Nuclear Security. 
(6)	 Coordinates the classification, transclassification, or declassification of 
any information with the Program Office with cognizance over the 
information. 
(7)	 Originally classifies as NSI any information under DOE’s cognizance, 
declassifies any NSI under DOE’s cognizance, and downgrades or 
upgrades the classification level of any NSI under DOE’s cognizance, 
with the concurrence of the Program Office with cognizance over the 
information.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(8)	 Evaluates Headquarters and field element classification programs to 
ensure compliance with national and DOE policy in accordance with 
Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
(9)	 Approves and cancels all classification guidance, with the concurrence of 
the NNSA Classification Officer for information under NNSA’s 
cognizance. 
(10)	 Conducts fundamental classification guidance reviews in accordance with 
section 1.9 of E.O. 13526 and 32 CFR § 2001.91(c). 
(11)	 Performs the duties of the Classification Officer for DOE (not including 
NNSA) Headquarters elements. 
(12)	 Makes the initial determination pertaining to the challenge of a 
classification determination concerning RD/FRD/TFNI or NSI. 
(13)	 Serves as the Denying Official for any classified information contained in 
a document requested under statute or Executive order. 
(14)	 Classifies an unmarked document found to contain classified information 
after the public requests the document under statute or Executive order 
and coordinates the classification with the Senior Agency Official for such 
NSI determinations. 
(15)	 Manages and conducts the training of Program Classification Officers, 
Classification Officers, Headquarters Classification Representatives, 
Alternate Headquarters Classification Headquarters Representatives, 
Original Classifiers, Derivative Declassifiers, and Headquarters Derivative 
Classifiers. 
(16)	 Appoints DOE (not including NNSA) Federal and contractor 
Classification Officers as Derivative Classifiers. 
(17)	 Appoints DOE (not including NNSA) Program Classification Officers, 
Classification Officers, Headquarters Classification Representatives, 
Alternate Headquarters Representatives, Derivative Declassifiers, and 
Headquarters Derivative Classifiers and terminates any appointments or 
authorities granted to these classification officials, as appropriate. 
(18)	 Ensures that patent applications and reports of inventions or discoveries 
covered by section 151 of the Atomic Energy Act are reviewed to 
determine whether to impose a secrecy order under the Invention Secrecy 
Act of 1951 or whether to control as RD. 
(19)	 Coordinates the search for and processing of documents requested under 
the mandatory declassification review provisions of 10 CFR part 1045 or 
section 3.5 of E.O. 13526.

--- page 7 ---
7 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(20)	 Conducts all coordination required to declassify a document or material 
that contains foreign government information. 
(21)	 Conducts any interagency coordination required to declassify a document 
or material containing information under the cognizance of another 
Agency when the document or material relates to litigation or is requested 
under statute or Executive order. 
(22)	 Establishes a system for processing, tracking, and recording formal 
classification challenges and declassification proposals made by 
authorized holders of classified information. 
(23)	 Coordinates with the cognizant Classification Officer, Program 
Classification Officer, or Headquarters Classification Representative, as 
appropriate, and responds to formal challenges and declassification 
proposals received. 
(24)	 Consolidates classification program data and reports such data to the 
ISOO annually as required by 32 CFR § 2001.90. 
(25)	 Grants equivalencies and exemptions to this order for DOE (not including 
NNSA). 
d.	 NNSA Chief of Defense Nuclear Security. 
(1)	 Oversees the NNSA enterprise-wide classification program. 
(2)	 Concurs on any classification, declassification, and transclassification 
action made by the Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, 
Safety and Security or the Director, Office of Classification, concerning 
RD or FRD information under NNSA’s cognizance. 
(3)	 Develops and issues NNSA-specific instructions for implementing this 
Order as necessary. 
(4)	 Appoints NNSA Secret and Confidential Original Classifiers in 
consultation with the Senior Agency Official for E.O. 13526. Appoints an 
NNSA Program Classification Officer with the following additional 
Classification Officer functions: 
(a)	 Grants equivalencies and exemptions to this order for NNSA in 
consultation with the Director, Office of Classification. 
(b)	 Appoints NNSA Federal and contractor Classification Officers as 
Derivative Classifiers. 
(c)	 Appoints NNSA Federal and contractor classification officials, 
including Classification Officers, Headquarters Classification

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
Representatives, Derivative Declassifiers, and Headquarters 
Derivative Classifiers. 
(d)	 Concurs on all classification guidance concerning information 
under NNSA’s cognizance. 
(e)	 Requests and monitors the training and testing of NNSA Original 
Classifiers, Classification Officers, Derivative Declassifiers, 
Headquarters Classification Representatives, and Headquarters 
Derivative Classifiers. 
e.	 Director, Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence. 
(1)	 Ensures that any conflicts between ICDs or ICPGs and this Order are 
coordinated with the Director, Office of Classification, and the IN 
Program Classification Officer. 
(2)	 Oversees classification actions involving sensitive compartmented 
information, including the activities of Field Intelligence Elements and 
Field Counterintelligence Offices. 
(3)	 Ensures that intelligence and counterintelligence-related classification 
guidance for non-DOE-funded work conforms to existing DOE 
classification policy. 
(4)	 Ensures that classified documents are marked in accordance with 
procedures promulgated by the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI). 
(5)	 Ensures that marking procedures for DOE equities (e.g., RD, FRD, TFNI) 
are properly addressed in DNI procedures. 
(6)	 Nominates a Federal employee to serve as Program Classification Officer 
to provide oversight of the classification programs at Field Intelligence 
Elements and Field Counterintelligence Offices and to coordinate between 
these programs and the Director, Office of Classification. 
(7)	 Coordinates with the cognizant Classification Officer to ensure Field 
Intelligence Elements and Field Counterintelligence Offices are 
evaluated in accordance with Attachment 5, Classification Program 
Evaluations. 
f.	 Director, Office of Public Affairs, and offices responsible for official 
communications with the public. Ensure that documents in a classified subject 
area intended for public release are coordinated with the cognizant Classification 
Officer for review prior to release.

--- page 9 ---
9 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
g.	 Heads of Headquarters Elements and Managers of Field Elements. 
(1)	 Provide sufficient staffing for implementation and oversight of the 
classification program within the element to ensure the identification of 
classified information through the accurate and accountable application of 
classification standards. Ensure that contracting officers are notified of any 
contracts generating classified information, documents, or material so that 
DEAR clause 952.204-70, "Classification/Declassification," DEAR clause 
970.5204-1, “Counterintelligence,” for M&O and other facilities 
management contracts, and the contents of the CRD for this Order are 
incorporated into those contracts. 
(2)	 Ensure performance awards incorporate performance of classification 
requirements into award fee determinations. 
(3)	 Ensure that a satisfactory level of performance of the requirements in this 
Order is maintained, to include holding personnel accountable for 
implementing the requirements, as appropriate. 
(4)	 Ensure that classified information contained in documents or material is 
correctly identified, and the appropriate classifier markings are placed on 
such documents or material. 
(5)	 Ensure that documents or material are reviewed, classified, declassified, 
downgraded, and upgraded as specified in Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
(6)	 Ensure that documents in classified subject areas that are intended for 
public release (e.g., for a publicly available webpage, for news 
organizations), including documents provided to or testimony given to 
Congress, are coordinated with the appropriate Classification Officer for 
review prior to release. 
(7)	 Ensure that comprehensive searches are conducted for documents 
responsive to Freedom of Information Act requests or mandatory 
declassification review requests under 10 CFR § 1045.42 and section 3.5 
of E.O. 13526 in response to an inquiry from the Director, Office of 
Classification. 
(8)	 Ensure that classification guidance for sensitive compartmented 
information programs or special access programs concerning information 
under the Headquarters’ or field element’s purview is developed and that 
the Director, Office of Classification, or his or her designee is provided 
access to such classification guidance. 
(9)	 Nominate a Federal employee to serve as Program Classification Officer, 
Field Element Classification Officer, Headquarters Classification 
Representative, or Alternate Headquarters Classification Representative,

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
as appropriate in accordance with the requirements in Attachment 2, 
Appointment of Classification Officials. 
(10)	 Ensure Program Classification Officers, Field Element Classification 
Officers, Headquarters Classification Representatives, or Alternate 
Headquarters Classification Representatives have access to senior 
management when necessary. 
(11)	 Ensure that work in a classified subject area funded by a non-DOE entity 
is not started until classification guidance that has been certified by a 
Classification Officer or Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, is 
provided, unless the use of source documents is authorized. 
(12)	 Ensure that all employees authorized access to classified information 
complete a classification awareness briefing when they first receive their 
clearances and at least annually thereafter. 
(13)	 Ensure that classification officials with appropriate authority who 
misclassify documents or materials do not face penalties as long as such 
determinations are within their authority and are based on reasonable 
interpretations of guidance. 
(14)	 Ensure that employees who formally challenge the classification of 
information are not subject to retribution. 
(15)	 Ensure that employees who submit declassification proposals are not 
subject to retribution. 
(16)	 Ensure that evaluations, self-assessments, classification decision reviews, 
and corrective action plans are completed and reports are submitted in 
accordance with Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
(17)	 Ensure that the performance contract or other system used to rate Federal 
personnel performance includes the management of classified information 
as a critical element or item to be evaluated in the rating of Program 
Classification Officers, Classification Officers, Headquarters 
Classification Representatives, Original Classifiers, Derivative 
Declassifiers, and those Derivative Classifiers who make a significant 
number of classification determinations annually. 
h.	 Program Classification Officer. 
(1)	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of Headquarters and field 
classification programs under the cognizance of the Headquarters element 
and maintains operational awareness of the classification programs under 
the element’s cognizance in accordance with Attachment 5, Classification 
Program Evaluations.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
11 
(2) Delegates in writing any functions that he or she has been assigned by this 
Order to qualified individuals as necessary to implement the classification 
program. Note: This does not include the Program Classification Officer’s 
classification and declassification authorities, which are non-delegable. 
(3) Concurs on the nominations of Alternate Headquarters Classification 
Representatives, Derivative Classifiers, and Derivative Declassifiers to 
ensure that such officials are technically competent and submits the 
nomination in accordance with Attachment 2, Appointment of 
Classification Officials. 
(4) Reviews draft classification guidance, including proposed updates, 
submitted by field elements and forwards such guidance to the Director, 
Office of Classification, for approval in accordance with Attachment 3, 
Classification Guidance. 
(5) Reviews the notification submitted by a field element under his or her 
cognizance that confirms the completion of the cover-to-cover review of 
guidance developed by that field element and forwards the notification to 
the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance with Attachment 3, 
Classification Guidance. 
(6) Reviews the notification submitted by a field element under his or her 
cognizance concerning the conduct of a large-scale declassification review 
of documents containing more than 25,000 pages and forwards such 
notification to the Director, Office of Classification. 
(7) Ensures that classified information in documents requested under statute 
or Executive order is identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in 
accordance with Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act 
and Mandatory Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, 
Bracketing and Redaction Procedures. 
(8) Responds to classification challenges received and forwards unresolved 
formal challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance 
with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
(9) Performs any additional duties of the Headquarters Classification 
Representative that are identified in paragraph j. below. 
i. Field Element Classification Officer.
 
(1)	 Manages the field element classification program. 
(2)	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of the field element classification 
programs and maintains operational awareness of the classification 
programs under the field element’s cognizance in accordance with 
Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations.

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(3)	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of all classification programs for 
subordinate elements with no Classification Officer. Conducts 
evaluations, self-assessments, and classification decision reviews for such 
elements in accordance with Attachment 5, Classification Program 
Evaluations. 
(4)	 Concurs on the nomination of contractor Classification Officers and 
Derivative Declassifiers, as appropriate, to ensure that such officials are 
technically competent and submits them in accordance with Attachment 2, 
Appointment of Classification Officials. 
(5)	 Appoints Derivative Classifiers for the field element and for any 
subordinate elements or for contractors with no Classification Officer to 
classify documents generated by the element or subordinate element, the 
contractor, and any predecessor organizations. Ensures that these officials 
are technically competent in the specific areas of their classification 
authorities and terminates these authorities when appropriate. 
(6)	 Appoints Derivative Classifiers to classify documents generated by 
another organization with the concurrence of that organization’s 
Classification Officer. Ensures that these officials are technically 
competent in the specific areas of their classification authorities and 
terminates these authorities when appropriate. 
(7)	 Develops and conducts classification training for Derivative Classifiers 
that he or she appoints. 
(8)	 Coordinates with the IN Program Classification Officer to ensure proper 
training and evaluations of appropriate individuals within Field 
Intelligence Elements and Counterintelligence Offices. 
(9)	 Ensures that all classification training and awareness briefings satisfy the 
requirements in Attachment 6, Classification Education Program. 
(10)	 Ensures that Derivative Classifiers and Derivative Declassifiers have 
appropriate and current classification guidance. 
(11)	 Ensures that classified information in documents requested under statute 
or Executive order is identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in 
accordance with Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act 
and Mandatory Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, 
Bracketing and Redaction Procedures. 
(12)	 Compiles statistics concerning the field element classification program 
and forwards them through the Program Classification Officer, as 
applicable, to the Director, Office of Classification, when requested.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
13 
(13) As needed, prepares draft classification guidance that is more detailed and 
tailored to the needs of his or her field element and is based on other 
current classification guidance and forwards such guidance through the 
Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, to the Director, Office of 
Classification, for approval. 
(14) Conducts a cover-to-cover review of guidance developed by his or her 
element at least once every 5 years to ensure that it is up to date and 
notifies the Director, Office of Classification, through the Program 
Classification Officer, as appropriate, of the review’s completion. 
(15) Evaluates the impact of new or revised classification guidance issued by 
the Office of Classification upon existing classification guidance 
developed by his or her element and submits proposed updates for any 
affected classification guidance within 90 calendar days to the Director, 
Office of Classification, through the Program Classification Officer, as 
appropriate. 
(16) Conducts any interagency coordination required to declassify a document 
or material containing information under the cognizance of another 
Agency except when the document or material relates to litigation or is 
requested under statute or Executive order. 
(17) For DOE-funded work performed by the field element, certifies that 
classification guidance is identified, as appropriate. 
(18) For non-DOE-funded work performed by the field element, certifies that 
classification guidance provided by the funding entity does not contradict 
DOE classification guidance. 
(19) Ensures that field element documents subject to section 3.3 of E.O. 13526 
are reviewed prior to such documents becoming 25 years old. 
(20) Notifies the Director, Office of Classification, through the Program 
Classification Officer, as appropriate, of any large-scale declassification 
reviews of documents containing more than 25,000 pages being conducted 
at his or her site. 
(21) Responds to formal classification challenges received and forwards 
unresolved challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in 
accordance with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
(22) Delegates in writing any functions that he or she has been assigned by this 
Order to qualified individuals as necessary to implement the field element 
classification program. Note: This does not include the Classification 
Officer’s classification and declassification authorities, which are non-
delegable.

--- page 14 ---
14 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
j.	 Headquarters Classification Representative. 
(1)	 Assists individuals within his or her Headquarters element to implement 
the requirements in this Order. 
(2)	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of the Headquarters element 
classification program. Conducts self-assessments and classification 
decision reviews and submits appropriate reports. 
(3)	 Maintains operational awareness of the classification issues in his or her 
Headquarters element in accordance with Attachment 5, Classification 
Program Evaluations. 
(4)	 Concurs on the nominations of Alternate Headquarters Classification 
Representatives, Derivative Classifiers, and Derivative Declassifiers to 
ensure that such officials are technically competent and submits the 
nomination in accordance with Attachment 2, Appointment of 
Classification Officials. 
(5)	 Ensures that Derivative Classifiers and Derivative Declassifiers within his 
or her Headquarters element have appropriate and current classification 
guidance. 
(6)	 For DOE-funded work performed by the Headquarters element, certifies 
that classification guidance is identified, as appropriate. 
(7)	 For non-DOE-funded work, certifies that classification guidance provided 
by the funding entity does not contradict DOE classification guidance. 
(8)	 Ensures that classified information in documents requested under statute 
or Executive order is identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in 
accordance with Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act 
and Mandatory Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, 
Bracketing and Redaction Procedures. 
(9)	 Responds to classification challenges received and forwards unresolved 
challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance with 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
(10)	 Compiles statistics concerning the Headquarters element classification 
program and forwards them to the Director, Office of Classification, when 
requested. 
(11)	 Delegates in writing any functions that he or she has been assigned by this 
Order to qualified individuals as necessary to implement the Headquarters 
element classification program. Note: This does not include the 
Headquarters Classification Representative’s classification and/or 
declassification authorities, which are non-delegable.

--- page 15 ---
15 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
k.	 Original Classifier. 
(1)	 Makes the initial determination to classify information as NSI in 
accordance with sections 1.1 through 1.7 of E.O. 13526. 
(2)	 Reports any original classification determination to the Director, Office 
of Classification, through the Program Classification Officer, as 
applicable, within 10 working days, providing a description of the 
information being originally classified, the reason for classification, and 
the level and duration of classification. 
(3)	 Ensures each originally classified NSI document is marked in 
accordance with 32 CFR § 2001.21 and, except for intelligence products 
intended for the Intelligence Community, the front page of each 
document contains the special control marking identified in Attachment 
4, paragraph 1c(3)(b), of this Order. 
l.	 Derivative Classifier. 
(1)	 Determines whether a document or material contains classified 
information or whether a document or material should be upgraded in 
accordance with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
(2)	 Responds to classification challenges received and forwards unresolved 
challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance with 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
m.	 Derivative Declassifier. 
(1)	 Determines whether a document or material currently marked as 
classified may be declassified or downgraded in accordance with 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Decision Reviews. 
(2)	 Brackets classified information in a classified document to produce a 
redacted version in accordance with Attachment 8, Bracketing and 
Redaction Procedures. 
(3)	 Responds to classification challenges received and forwards unresolved 
challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance with 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
n.	 Employee with Authorized Access to Classified Information. 
(1)	 Ensures that each document or material that the employee originates, 
modifies, or possesses in a classified subject area that is intended for 
public release is reviewed by the Classification Officer or a Derivative 
Classifier delegated such review authority.

--- page 16 ---
16 DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(2)	 Ensures that each document or material that the employee originates and 
that is potentially classified is reviewed by a Derivative Classifier. 
(3)	 Ensures that each document or material that the employee possesses that 
the employee believes is misclassified is reviewed by a Derivative 
Classifier or a Derivative Declassifier, as appropriate. 
(4)	 Ensures that classified documents (including documents with 
declassification dates or events that have passed) are not declassified 
until the appropriate declassification reviews are conducted. 
(5)	 Challenges any classification determinations he or she believes is 
incorrect in accordance with Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements, paragraph 4. 
(6)	 Submits declassification proposals for classified information he or she 
does not believe should be classified in accordance with Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
o.	 Procurement Request Originator. Ensures that blocks 13 and 14 on Form DOE F 
470.1, Contract Security Classification Specification, are completed correctly for 
contracts that generate classified information, documents, or material. 
p.	 Contracting Officers. Once notified that contracts under their purview are 
covered by this Order, incorporate the CRD for this Order and any other 
appropriate clauses into the affected contracts. 
6.	 REFERENCES. 
a.	 Public Law (P.L.) 83-503, Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. This statute 
provides the legal bases for identifying and protecting RD, FRD, and TFNI. 
b.	 P.L. 106-65, National Nuclear Security Administration Act, Title XXXII, as 
amended. This statute establishes a separately organized agency within the 
Department of Energy. 
c.	 P.L. 82-256, Invention Secrecy Act of 1951, as amended. This statute contains 
requirements for identifying classified information during patent reviews. 
d.	 10 CFR Part 1004, Freedom of Information. These regulations define and identify 
Denying Officials within DOE. 
e.	 10 CFR Part 1045, Nuclear Classification and Declassification. These regulations 
contain requirements and responsibilities for classifying, declassifying, and 
transclassifying RD and FRD and for processing mandatory declassification 
review requests and classification challenges.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 475.2B 17 (and 18) 
10-3-2014 
f.	 32 CFR Part 2001, Classified National Security Information. These regulations 
contain requirements and responsibilities for implementing the requirements in 
E.O. 13526. 
g.	 E.O. 12333, United States Intelligence Activities, dated 12-4-1981. This 
Executive order contains requirements and responsibilities for conducting 
intelligence activities. 
h.	 E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information, dated 12-29-09. This 
Executive order contains requirements and responsibilities for classifying, 
declassifying, and safeguarding NSI. 
i.	 E.O. 13470, Further Amendments to Executive Order 12333, United States 
Intelligence Activities, dated 7-30-08. This Executive order contains requirements 
and responsibilities for intelligence-related activities. 
j.	 DOE O 226.1B, Department of Energy Oversight Policy, dated 4-25-2011. This 
Order contains requirements and responsibilities for implementing DOE line 
management oversight. 
k.	 DOE O 205.1B, Department of Energy Cyber Security Program, dated 5-16-11. 
This Order contains requirements and responsibilities for DOE’s cyber security 
program. 
l.	 DOE O 471.6, Admin Chg. 1, Information Security, dated 6-20-2011. This Order 
contains requirements for the protection and control of classified matter. 
m.	 Intelligence Community Directive 710, Classification Management and Control 
Markings System, dated 06-21-2013. Governs the implementation and oversight 
of Intelligence Community classification management and control markings. 
7.	 DEFINITIONS. See Attachment 9 for definitions of terms contained in this Order and/or 
necessary for implementing the DOE classification program. 
8.	 CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Office of 
Classification at 301-903-7567 or outreach@hq.doe.gov. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
DANIEL B. PONEMAN 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 18 ---


--- page 19 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 1
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
 
This Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) establishes the requirements for Department of 
Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) contractors whose 
contracts may generate classified information, documents, or material. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this CRD, contractors are responsible for 
complying with Attachments 2-9 to this Order referenced in and made a part of this CRD and 
that provide program requirements and/or information applicable to contracts in which this 
CRD is inserted. Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for 
complying with the requirements of this CRD. The contractor is responsible for flowing down 
the requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the 
contractor’s compliance with the requirements. 
A violation of the provisions of the CRD relating to the safeguarding or security of 
Restricted Data or other classified information may result in a civil penalty pursuant to 
subsection a. of section 234B of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2282b). The 
procedures for the assessment of civil penalties are set forth in Title 10 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 824, Procedural Rules for the Assessment of Civil Penalties for 
Classified Information Security Violations. 
1.	 REQUIREMENTS. All contractors with this CRD incorporated in their contracts must 
comply with the following requirements: 
a.	 Each contractor that generates classified information, documents, or 
materials must maintain a classification program that ensures the 
identification of classified information through the accurate and accountable 
application of classification standards. 
b.	 Each contractor that generates classified information, documents, or material 
must have a Classification Officer. This requirement may be fulfilled by a 
Classification Officer either within or from outside the contractor. 
c.	 Each contractor requests equivalencies/exemptions to this Order from the 
Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) or the 
NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA. Requests must identify the Order 
requirement for which the equivalency/exemption is being requested; explain 
why the equivalency or exemption is needed; and if requesting an 
equivalency, describe the alternate measures for addressing the requirement. 
d.	 Classified information contained in documents or material must be correctly 
identified, basing such determinations on current classification guidance 
developed in accordance with Attachment 3, Classification Guidance, or 
source documents as permitted by paragraph 1.b. of Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. Appropriate classifier 
markings must be placed on the documents or material in accordance with 
Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements.

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2 10-3-2014 
e. Sufficient staffing must be provided for implementation and oversight of the 
contractor’s classification program. 
f. A satisfactory level of performance of the requirements in this CRD must be 
maintained, to include holding personnel accountable for implementing the 
requirements, as appropriate. 
g. Documents and material must be reviewed, classified, declassified, 
downgraded, or upgraded only by individuals with appropriate authorities in 
accordance with Attachment 2, Appointment of Classification Officials. 
h. Documents and material must be reviewed, classified, declassified, 
downgraded, or upgraded in accordance with Attachment 4, 
Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
i. Classified information in documents requested under statute or Executive 
order must be identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in accordance 
with Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act and Mandatory 
Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, Bracketing and 
Redaction Procedures. 
j. Classification officials with appropriate authority who misclassify documents 
or materials must not face penalties as long as such determinations are within 
their authority and are based on reasonable interpretations of guidance. 
k. Offices responsible for public affairs must submit documents in classified 
subject areas that are intended for public release to the Classification Officer 
for review prior to release. 
l. Classification guidance must be identified or the use of source documents 
must be approved for all work performed in a classified subject area that may 
generate derivatively classified documents or material. The guidance must 
satisfy the requirements of Attachment 3, Classification Guidance. 
m. Classification guidance for non-DOE-funded work must not contradict DOE 
classification guidance. 
n. For DOE-funded work performed by the contractor or its subcontractors, the 
contractor must certify that classification guidance is identified. 
o. Classification officials must be provided with current and appropriate 
classification guidance. 
p. Contractors must respond to classification challenges and declassification 
proposals in accordance with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification 
Review Requirements.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 1
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
q.	 Each contractor’s classification program must be periodically evaluated in 
accordance with Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
r.	 Each contractor must ensure the satisfactory performance of all subordinate 
elements with no Classification Officer through evaluations in accordance 
with Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
s.	 Training programs must be conducted in accordance with Attachment 6, 
Classification Education Program, of this Order to ensure that employees 
serving as classification officials are competent in their classification-related 
responsibilities. 
t.	 Employees with authorized access to classified information must receive a 
classification awareness briefing when they are first authorized access and 
annually thereafter that, at a minimum, covers the information in 
Attachment 6, Classification Education Program, paragraph 1.b. 
2.	 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONTRACTOR CLASSIFICATION OFFICER. 
a.	 Manages the contractor’s classification program. 
b.	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of the contractor’s classification 
program and maintains operational awareness of any classification issues in 
accordance with Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
c.	 Develops and conducts classification training for Derivative Classifiers that 
he or she appoints in accordance with Attachment 6, Classification Education 
Program. 
d.	 Ensures that all classification training and awareness briefings satisfy 
requirements in Attachment 6, Classification Education Program. 
e.	 Coordinates with the IN Program Classification Officer to ensure proper 
training and evaluations of Field Intelligence Elements and Field 
Counterintelligence Offices. 
f.	 Appoints contractor Derivative Classifiers to classify documents generated 
by the contractor, its subcontractors, and predecessor organizations. Ensures 
that these officials are technically competent in the specific areas of their 
classification authorities and terminates these authorities when appropriate. 
g.	 Concurs on the nomination of contractor Derivative Declassifiers to ensure 
that such officials are technically competent. 
h.	 Appoints Derivative Classifiers to classify documents generated by 
organizations outside of the contractor with the concurrence of the cognizant 
Classification Officer. Ensures that these officials are technically competent

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4 10-3-2014 
in the specific areas of their classification authorities and terminates these 
authorities when appropriate. 
i. Ensures that contractor Derivative Classifiers and Derivative Declassifiers 
have appropriate and current classification guidance. 
j. Ensures that classified information in documents requested under statute or 
Executive order is identified, reviewed, bracketed, and submitted in 
accordance with Attachment 7, Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act and 
Mandatory Declassification Review Requirements, and Attachment 8, 
Bracketing and Redaction Procedures. 
k. Compiles statistics concerning the contractor’s classification program and 
forwards them through the Field Element Classification Officer and the 
Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, to the Director, Office of 
Classification, when requested. 
l. As needed, prepares draft classification guidance that is more detailed and 
tailored to the needs of the contractor and is based on other current 
classification guidance and forwards such guidance to the Director, Office of 
Classification, for approval, through the Field Element Classification Officer 
and the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate. 
m. Conducts a cover-to-cover review of guidance developed by the contractor at 
least once every 5 years to ensure it is up to date and notifies the Director, 
Office of Classification, through the Field Element Classification Officer and 
the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, of its completion. 
n. Evaluates the impact of new or revised classification guidance issued by the 
Office of Classification upon existing classification guidance developed by 
the contractor and submits proposed updates for any affected classification 
guidance within 90 calendar days to the Director, Office of Classification, 
through the Field Element Classification Officer and the Program 
Classification Officer, as appropriate. 
o. Conducts any interagency coordination required to declassify a document or 
material containing information under the cognizance of another Agency 
except when the document or material relates to litigation or is requested 
under statute or Executive order. 
p. For DOE-funded work performed by the contractor, certifies that 
classification guidance is identified, as appropriate. 
q. For non-DOE-funded work performed by the contractor, certifies that 
classification guidance provided by the funding entity does not contradict 
DOE classification guidance.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 1
 
10-3-2014	 Page 5 (and Page 6) 
r.	 Ensures the satisfactory performance of any subordinate organizations with 
no Classification Officer. Includes such organizations in self-assessments 
and classification document reviews conducted in accordance with 
Attachment 5, Classification Program Evaluations. 
s.	 Ensures that contractor documents subject to section 3.3 of E.O. 13526 are 
reviewed prior to such documents becoming 25 years old. 
t.	 Notifies the Director, Office of Classification, through the Field Element 
Classification Officer and the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, 
of any large-scale declassification reviews of documents containing more 
than 25,000 pages being conducted by the contractor. 
u.	 Responds to classification challenges received and forwards unresolved 
formal challenges to the Director, Office of Classification, in accordance 
with Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
v.	 Delegates in writing any functions that he or she has been assigned by this 
CRD to qualified individuals as necessary to implement the contractor’s 
classification program. This does not include the Classification Officer’s 
classification and declassification authorities, which are non-delegable.

--- page 24 ---


--- page 25 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 2
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
APPOINTMENT OF CLASSIFICATION OFFICIALS
 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as well as 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 ROLE OF CLASSIFICATION OFFICIALS. DOE relies upon a hierarchy of 
classification officials to ensure that RD, FRD, TFNI, and NSI are correctly identified in 
documents and material. These classification officials are an integral component of 
DOE’s classification program. 
2.	 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPOINTING CLASSIFICATION OFFICIALS. Classification 
officials must be appointed according to the following requirements: 
a.	 Program Classification Officer. 
(1)	 Qualifications. The Program Classification Officer must be a Federal 
employee and have a relevant scientific or technical degree or work 
experience as validated by the appointing official. The Program 
Classification Officer must be in a position to have access to senior 
management when necessary. 
(2)	 Classification/Declassification Authorities Required. The Program 
Classification Officer must be a Derivative Classifier prior to appointment 
and must be a Derivative Declassifier within 6 months of appointment. 
(3)	 Nomination for DOE (not including NNSA) Program Classification 
Officer. The head of the Headquarters element or his or her representative 
submits the following information to the Director, Office of Classification: 
(a)	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing address (including 
organization code), telephone number, and email address; 
(b)	 a description of the employee’s scientific or technical degree 
and/or relevant work experience; and 
(c)	 a description of the employee’s knowledge about the work being 
performed in classified subject areas by Headquarters or field 
elements or contractors within his or her program. 
(4)	 Appointing Official. The Program Classification Officer is appointed by 
the Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA). 
The NNSA Program Classification Officer is appointed by the NNSA 
Chief of Defense Nuclear Security. 
(5)	 Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.)

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 2	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
(6)	 Removal from Position. The Program Classification Officer must be 
removed from the position by the appointing official or the head of the 
Headquarters element or his or her representative if he or she cannot or 
does not perform his or her responsibilities reliably or does not complete 
all required training within the specified time frame. 
b.	 Field Element and Contractor Classification Officer. 
(1)	 Qualifications. The Classification Officer must have a relevant scientific 
or technical degree or work experience as validated by the appointing 
official. The Field Element and contractor Classification Officer must be 
in a position to have access to senior management when necessary. 
(2)	 Classification/Declassification Authorities Required. The Classification 
Officer must be a Derivative Classifier prior to appointment and must be a 
Derivative Declassifier within 6 months of appointment. 
(3)	 Nomination. 
(a)	 Field Element Classification Officer. The manager of the field 
element or his or her representative submits the following 
information to the Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not 
including NNSA) or to the NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA 
through the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate: 
1	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing address 
(including organization code), telephone number, and 
email address; 
2	 a description of the employee’s scientific or technical 
degree and/or relevant work experience; 
3	 a description of the employee’s knowledge about the work 
being performed in classified subject areas in his or her 
organization and/or subordinate organizations; and 
4	 request for classification/declassification authorities in 
his/her position as Classification Officer. 
(b)	 Contractor Classification Officer. The contractor submits the 
information in paragraph 2.b.(3)(a) above to the appropriate Field 
Element Classification Officer, who reviews the nominee’s 
qualifications and, if adequate, forwards to the Director, Office of 
Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) or to the NNSA 
Classification Officer for NNSA through the Program 
Classification Officer, as appropriate.

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 2
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
(4)	 Appointing Official. The Classification Officer is appointed by the 
Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) or the 
NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA. These individuals also appoint 
the Classification Officer as a Derivative Classifier and a Derivative 
Declassifier. 
(5)	 Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.) 
(6)	 Removal from Position. The Classification Officer must be removed from 
the position by the appointing official or the manager of the field element 
or contractor or his or her representative if he or she cannot or does not 
perform his or her responsibilities reliably or does not complete all 
required training within the specified time frame. 
c.	 Headquarters Classification Representative and Alternate Headquarters 
Classification Representatives . 
(1)	 Qualifications. The Headquarters Classification Representative and the 
Alternate Headquarters Classification Representatives must be Federal 
employees knowledgeable about the work being performed in classified 
subject areas in their Headquarters element. 
(2)	 Classification/Declassification Authorities Required. The Headquarters 
Classification Representative and the Alternate Headquarters 
Classification Representatives must be Derivative Classifiers prior to 
appointment. 
(3)	 Nomination. 
(a)	 Headquarters Classification Representative and Alternate 
Headquarters Classification Representative. The head of the 
Headquarters element or his or her representative submits the 
following information to the Director, Office of Classification, for 
DOE (not including NNSA) or to the NNSA Classification Officer 
for NNSA: 
1	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing address 
(including organization code), telephone number, and 
email address and 
2	 a description of the employee’s knowledge about the work 
being performed in classified subject areas in his or her 
Headquarters element. 
(b)	 Alternate Headquarters Classification Representative. In addition 
to the above, the nomination for the Alternate Headquarters 
Classification Representative must include:

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 2	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4	 10-3-2014 
1	 duties to be performed by the Alternate Headquarters 
Classification Representative; 
2	 when the Alternate Headquarters Classification 
Representative performs these duties (e.g., at any time, 
only when the Headquarters Classification Representative 
is on leave or on travel); and 
3	 jurisdiction of the Alternate Headquarters Classification 
Representative (e.g., for a specific office within a 
program). 
(4)	 Appointing Official. The Headquarters Classification Representative and 
the Alternate Headquarters Classification Representatives are appointed 
by the Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) 
or the NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA. 
(5)	 Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.) 
(6)	 Removal from Position. The Headquarters Classification Representative 
and the Alternate Headquarters Classification Representatives must be 
removed from their positions by the appointing official or the head of the 
Headquarters element or his or her representative if they cannot or do not 
perform their responsibilities reliably or do not complete the required 
training within the specified time frame. 
d.	 Original Classifier. 
(1)	 Top Secret Original Classifier. 
(a)	 Qualifications. A Top Secret Original Classifier must be a Federal 
employee. 
(b)	 Appointing Official. The Secretary of Energy appoints each Top 
Secret Original Classifier unless otherwise provided for by 
Secretarial Delegation. 
(c)	 Training. A Top Secret Original Classifier must complete training 
provided by the Office of Classification prior to using the 
authority. Training must be repeated at least once every calendar 
year thereafter. If the annual training is not completed, the 
authority is suspended until the training is completed. 
(d)	 Delegation of Authority. A Top Secret Original Classifier may 
not delegate his or her authority to anyone, and such authority 
may not be assumed by a person acting for a Top Secret Original 
Classifier.

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 2
 
10-3-2014	 Page 5 
(2)	 Secret or Confidential Original Classifier. 
(a)	 Qualifications. A Secret or Confidential Original Classifier must 
be a Federal employee who is competent in the relevant subject 
areas for which the authority is needed and familiar with DOE 
classification policy, procedures, and guidance. 
(b)	 Nomination. The immediate supervisor of the employee submits 
the following information to the Director, Office of Classification, 
for DOE (not including NNSA) or to the NNSA Chief of Defense 
Nuclear Security for NNSA, through the Classification Officer, 
Program Classification Officer, or Headquarters Classification 
Representative, as appropriate, for confirmation of the need for an 
Original Classifier: 
1	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing address 
(including organization code), telephone number, and 
email address; 
2	 the subject areas in which the authority will be used; 
3	 the desired jurisdiction (e.g., information originated within 
a particular organization); and 
4	 a description of the employee’s competence in the subject 
areas and familiarity with classification policy and 
procedures. 
(c)	 Appointing Official. A Secret or Confidential Original Classifier is 
appointed in writing by the Associate Under Secretary for 
Environment, Health, Safety and Security for DOE (not including 
NNSA) and the NNSA Chief of Defense Nuclear Security, in 
consultation with the Associate Under Secretary for Environment, 
Health, Safety and Security for NNSA. 
(d)	 Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.) 
(e)	 Appointment. The employee must be appointed in writing as a 
Secret or Confidential Original Classifier and must be provided 
with an authority description that includes the employee’s name, 
organization, the effective date, the specific subject areas covered 
by the authority, the jurisdiction of the authority, and any special 
instructions or limitations on the authority. 
(f)	 Authority Limitations. A Secret or Confidential Original Classifier 
may originally classify information only as authorized by his or her 
description of authority. A Secret or Confidential Original 
Classifier may not declassify information.

--- page 30 ---
Attachment 2	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 6	 10-3-2014 
(g)	 Delegation of Authority. A Secret or Confidential Original 
Classifier may not delegate his or her authority to anyone, and such 
authority may not be assumed by a person acting for an Original 
Classifier. 
(h)	 Termination of Authority. A Secret or Confidential Original 
Classifier’s authority must be terminated by the appointing official 
if he or she no longer requires the authority, cannot or does not 
exercise the authority reliably, or does not complete the required 
training within 90 calendar days of suspension of his or her 
authority. 
e.	 Derivative Classifier. 
(1)	 Qualifications. A Derivative Classifier must be competent in the subject 
areas in which the authority will be used and familiar with DOE 
classification policy, procedures, and guidance. 
(2)	 Nomination. 
(a)	 Headquarters. 
1	 Submission. The immediate supervisor of the employee 
submits the information identified in paragraph 2.e.(2)(a)2 
below to the Headquarters Classification Representative, 
who ensures the required information is accurate and 
submits it to the Director, Office of Classification, for 
DOE (not including NNSA) or to the NNSA 
Classification Officer for NNSA. 
2	 Required Information. The nomination must include the 
following information: 
a	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing address 
(including organization code), telephone number, 
and email address; 
b	 the subject areas for which authority is needed; 
c	 the desired jurisdiction (e.g., documents originated 
within a particular organization); and 
d	 any special limitations on the authority (e.g., time 
frame of the documents). 
(b)	 Field Element or Contractors. The nomination process must be 
determined by the appointing official and must ensure that

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
Attachment 2 
Page 7 
Derivative Classifiers nominated are competent to exercise their 
authority. 
(3) Appointing Official. A Derivative Classifier is appointed by the following 
officials: 
(a) the Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including 
NNSA) Headquarters and DOE (not including NNSA) Field 
Element and Contractor Classification Officers; 
(b) the NNSA Classification Officer for all NNSA Federal officials, 
contractor Classification Officers and NNSA Headquarters; or 
(c) the Classification Officer for the appropriate Field Element or 
contractor. 
(4) Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.) 
(5) Appointment. A Derivative Classifier must be appointed in writing and 
must be provided with an authority description that includes the 
employee’s name, organization, the effective date, the classified subject 
areas (e.g., nuclear weapon design, gas centrifuge, safeguards and security) 
covered by the authority, the jurisdiction of the authority (e.g., a particular 
office, a specific Headquarters or field element), and any special instructions 
or limitations on the authority. 
(6) Authority Limitations. A Derivative Classifier may derivatively classify a 
new or existing document or material only as authorized by his or her 
description of authority. A Derivative Classifier cannot conduct the 
classification review for documents intended for public release in 
classified subject areas unless the authority has been delegated in writing 
in accordance with this Order. If the employee changes positions, he or 
she may retain the authority. The process for handling such changes is 
determined by the Classification Officer. 
(7) Delegation of Authority. A Derivative Classifier may not delegate his or 
her authority to anyone, and such authority may not be assumed by a 
person acting for a Derivative Classifier. 
(8) Suspension of Authority. If the required retraining is not completed 
within the 2-year time frame, the authority is suspended until the training 
is completed. 
(9) Termination of Authority. 
(a) An employee’s supervisor must request the termination of a 
Derivative Classifier’s authority from the appointing official if

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 2	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 8	 10-3-2014 
the Derivative Classifier no longer requires the authority or cannot 
or does not exercise the authority reliably. 
(b)	 The appointing official must terminate a Derivative Classifier’s 
authority if the Derivative Classifier no longer requires the 
authority, cannot or does not exercise the authority reliably, does 
not complete training requirements within 90 calendar days of 
suspension of his or her authority, or upon request of the Derivative 
Classifier’s supervisor. 
f.	 Derivative Declassifier. 
(1)	 Qualifications. A Derivative Declassifier must have a relevant degree or 
work experience, competency in the subject areas in which the authority 
will be used, and familiarity with DOE classification and declassification 
policy, procedures, and guidance, as validated by the appointing official. 
(2)	 Nomination. 
(a)	 Headquarters. 
1	 Submission. The immediate supervisor of the employee 
submits the information identified in paragraph 
2.f.(2)(a)2 below to the Program Classification Officer or 
Headquarters Classification Representative, who ensures 
the required information is accurate and submits it to the 
Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including 
NNSA) or to the NNSA Classification Officer for 
NNSA. 
2	 Required Information. The nomination must include the 
following information: 
a	 the employee’s name, organization, mailing 
address (including organization code), telephone 
number, and email address; 
b	 the employee’s relevant degree or work 
experience; 
c	 the subject areas and classification guidance for 
which authority is needed; 
d	 the desired jurisdiction (e.g., documents originated 
within a particular organization); and 
e	 any special limitations on the authority (e.g., time 
frame of the documents).

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
Attachment 2 
Page 9 
(b) Field Element or Contractor. 
1 Field Element and Contractor with no Classification 
Officer. The immediate supervisor of the Federal or 
contractor employee submits the information in paragraph 
2.f.(2)(a)2 above to the Field Element Classification 
Officer, who reviews the nominee’s qualifications and, if 
adequate, forwards the information through the Program 
Classification Officer, as appropriate, to the Director, 
Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) 
or to the NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA. 
2 Contractor with Classification Officers. The immediate 
supervisor of the contractor employee submits the 
information in paragraph 2.f.(2)(a)2 above to the 
Contractor Classification Officer, who reviews the 
nominee’s qualifications and, if adequate, forwards the 
information to the appropriate Field Element 
Classification Officer, who reviews the nominee’s 
qualifications and, if adequate, forwards the information 
to the Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not 
including NNSA) or to the NNSA Classification Officer 
for NNSA. 
(3) Appointing Official. A Derivative Declassifier is appointed by the 
Director, Office of Classification, for DOE (not including NNSA) or the 
NNSA Classification Officer for NNSA. 
(4) Training. (See Attachment 6, Classification Education Program.) 
(5) Appointment. A Derivative Declassifier must be appointed in writing and 
must be provided with an authority description that includes the 
employee’s name, organization, the effective date, the classified subject 
areas (e.g., nuclear weapon design, gas centrifuge, safeguards and security) 
covered by the authority, the jurisdiction of the authority (e.g., a particular 
office, a specific Headquarters element), and any special instructions or 
limitations on the authority. 
(6) Authority Limitations. A Derivative Declassifier may declassify a 
document or material only as authorized by his or her description of 
authority. If the employee changes positions, he or she may retain the 
authority. The process for handling such changes is determined by the 
Classification Officer, who must also notify the appointing official. 
(7) Delegation of Authority. A Derivative Declassifier may not delegate his or 
her authority to anyone, and such authority may not be assumed by a 
person acting for a Derivative Declassifier.

--- page 34 ---
Attachment 2 
Page 10 
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
(8) Suspension of Authority. If the required retraining is not completed 
within the 2-year time frame, the authority is suspended until the training 
is completed. 
(9) Termination of Authority. 
(a) An employee’s supervisor must request the termination of a 
Derivative Declassifier’s authority from the appointing official if 
the Derivative Declassifier no longer requires the authority or 
cannot or does not exercise the authority reliably. 
(b) The appointing official must terminate a Derivative Declassifier’s 
authority if the Derivative Declassifier no longer requires the 
authority, cannot or does not exercise the authority reliably, does 
not complete the retraining requirements within 90 calendar days 
of suspension of his or her authority, or upon the request of the 
Derivative Declassifier’s supervisor.

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 3
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
CLASSIFICATION GUIDANCE
 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 Requirement to Use Classification Guidance. Within DOE, classification guidance (i.e., 
guides and bulletins) is the foundation for the classification program. Classification 
guidance must be used as the basis for determining whether a document or material 
contains RD, FRD, TFNI, or NSI unless use of a source document is permitted by 
paragraph 1.b. of Attachment 4, Classification/Declassification Review Requirements. 
2.	 Requirements for Developing and Distributing Classification Guidance. 
a.	 Classification guidance must be developed in accordance with the requirements in 
10 CFR § 1045.37, section 2.2 of E.O. 13526, and 32 CFR § 2001.15. 
b.	 DOE classification guides must conform to the Standard Guide Format developed 
by the Office of Technical Guidance, Office of Classification, to the extent 
practical. 
c.	 The Office of Classification will distribute all new or revised classification 
guidance to the appropriate Classification Officers. The Classification Officer 
must distribute the new or revised classification guidance to the appropriate 
Derivative Classifiers and Derivative Declassifiers within 60 calendar days of 
receipt of the approved guidance. If the new or revised guidance is announcing 
that information has been upgraded or reclassified, it must be disseminated as 
soon as possible. 
3.	 Requirements for Maintaining Classification Guides. 
a.	 Classification guides must be revised to reflect determinations that information no 
longer meets the standards for classification in section 1.1 of E.O. 13526 or 
10 CFR § 1045.14. 
b.	 Each classification guide must receive a cover-to-cover review at least once every 
5 years. Classification Officers must notify the Office of Classification when 
reviews are complete. Updates to any guide must be submitted to the Director, 
Office of Classification, through the Field Element Classification Officer and the 
Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, within 90 days of completing the 
review. 
c.	 Upon receipt of a new or revised Headquarters classification guide, existing 
classification guides developed by Classification Officers must be evaluated to 
determine if changes need to be made to those guides. Proposed revisions to any 
affected guides must be submitted to the Director, Office of Classification, 
through the Field Element Classification Officer and the Program Classification 
Officer, as appropriate, within 90 calendar days.

--- page 36 ---
Attachment 3	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
d.	 Recipients of page changes to classification guides must make page or pen-and­
ink changes in guides that have been revised, as appropriate, within 45 calendar 
days of receipt of the page changes. 
4.	 Completion of DOE F 470.1, “Contract Security Classification Specification,” 
Concerning Classification Guidance for DOE-Funded Work. For contracts that generate 
classified information, documents, or material (i.e., Block 12 indicates the contract 
generates classified matter), certain sections of the “Contract Security Classification 
Specification” form must be completed as follows: 
a.	 Block 13 must list the classification guidance or a brief explanation as to why 
classification guidance is not needed. 
b.	 Block 14 must have the box for DEAR clause 952.204-70 checked. 
c.	 Block 18 must be signed by the Classification Officer, Headquarters 
Classification Representative, or a Derivative Classifier delegated the authority to 
certify that any classification guidance needed has been identified. 
5.	 Classification Guidance for Non-DOE-Funded Work in Classified Subject Areas. 
a.	 Certification of Classification Guidance. Prior to commencement of the work, the 
Classification Officer must review the work request and proposed classification 
guidance and certify in writing that the guidance does not contradict DOE 
classification guidance. 
b.	 Contradictory Guidance. If the proposed classification guidance contradicts DOE 
classification guidance, the contradictions must be resolved before using the 
guidance. 
c.	 Use of DOE Guidance. 
(1)	 Work That Involves RD/FRD/TFNI. DOE classification guidance 
concerning RD/FRD/TFNI may be used in place of or to supplement 
other-Agency classification guidance if the work involves RD/FRD/TFNI. 
(2)	 Work That Involves NSI. DOE classification guidance concerning NSI 
may be used if the work explicitly falls within the scope of such guidance, 
and the funding Agency agrees to such use in writing. 
6.	 Classification Guidance for Jointly Funded Work. Classification guidance for work 
performed at DOE facilities and funded by DOE and other U.S. Government 
organizations is the joint responsibility of the funding organizations. 
a.	 Availability of Guidance. The DOE organization responsible for funding the 
classified work must contact the Office of Classification, through the Field 
Element Classification Officer and the Program Classification Officer, as

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 475.2B Attachment 3
 
10-3-2014 Page 3 (and Page 4) 
appropriate, to ensure that appropriate joint classification guidance is either 
available or developed. 
b. Use of Other-Agency Classification Guidance. If NSI classification guidance 
covering the subject area(s) has already been developed by another of the funding 
agencies, the DOE organization responsible for funding the classified work must 
contact the Office of Classification who will coordinate with the Field Element 
Classification Officer and the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, to 
approve its use. The guidance may be used for up to 90 days pending final 
approval. 
7. Classification Guidance for DOE-Funded Work. 
a. Performed at Other Government Facilities. DOE organizations responsible for 
funding classified work at other Government facilities must contact the Office 
of Classification, through the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, to 
ensure that classification guidance covering the work is either available or 
developed. 
b. Performed at DOE Facilities concerning Classified Information under the 
Cognizance of another Agency. DOE organizations using another Agency’s 
classification guidance for work funded by DOE that is being performed at a 
DOE facility must submit such guidance to the Director, Office of 
Classification, through the Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, prior 
to its use.

--- page 38 ---


--- page 39 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
CLASSIFICATION/DECLASSIFICATION REVIEW REQUIREMENTS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as well 
as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 CLASSIFICATION. A document or material potentially containing classified 
information must be reviewed for classification to ensure that such information is 
identified for protection. 
a.	 Required Classification Reviews. 
(1)	 A newly generated document or material in a classified subject area that 
potentially contains classified information must receive a classification 
review by a Derivative Classifier. 
(2)	 An existing, unmarked document or material that an employee believes 
may contain classified information must receive a classification review 
by a Derivative Classifier. 
(3)	 An existing, marked document or material that an employee believes 
may contain information classified at a higher level or more restrictive 
category must receive a classification review by a Derivative Classifier. 
(4)	 A document or material generated in a classified subject area and 
intended for public release (e.g., for a publicly available webpage, for 
news organizations), including documents provided to or testimony given 
to Congress, must be reviewed by the Classification Officer or a 
Derivative Classifier who has been delegated this authority in writing. 
(5)	 Extracts. A newly generated document that consists of a complete 
section (e.g., chapter, attachment, appendix) 
(a)	 Marked as Classified. Extracts from a classified document that is 
marked as classified: 
1	 must be reviewed by a Derivative Classifier if it is 
intended to be a standalone classified document. 
2	 must be reviewed for declassification if it is intended to 
be an unclassified document. 
(b)	 Marked as Unclassified. When a complete section that is marked 
in its entirety as unclassified is removed from a classified 
document for use as a standalone document, a review is not 
required unless it is intended for public release. Reviews for 
public release must be performed in accordance with 1a(4).

--- page 40 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
(6)	 Printed output from a classified information system must be reviewed by 
a Derivative Classifier to determine the appropriate classification unless: 
(a)	 The output is a final document that has already been reviewed 
and is appropriately marked; 
(b)	 The printed output is a working paper that is: 
1	 properly marked at the highest potential level and 
category or 
2	 marked and protected at the highest level and category of 
information resident on the system; or 
(c)	 The program is verified to produce consistent output and the 
Classification Officer has determined that the output is 
consistently classified at a particular level and category or is 
unclassified. When the Classification Officer documents the 
classification determination, all printed output from the system 
using the fields or elements reviewed can use that determination 
as the basis for its classification. If any fields or elements are 
added or revised, a new classification review is required. 
b.	 Basis for Determination. 
(1)	 Restricted Data/Formerly Restricted Data. Current classification 
guidance must be used as the basis for determining whether a document 
or material contains RD/FRD and, if so, its classification level. 
Unclassified topics from canceled or obsolete guides may be used to 
determine that information is not classified when no current guidance 
exists. A source document may be used in place of classification 
guidance only as authorized by the Classification Officer or the Program 
Classification Officer. 
(2)	 Transclassified Foreign Nuclear Information. Classification protocols 
developed in coordination with the Intelligence Community must be used 
as the basis for determining whether a document or material contains 
TFNI. The classification level may be determined by using classification 
guidance applicable to comparable RD or FRD or by using a source 
document. 
(3)	 National Security Information. Current classification guidance must be 
used as the basis for determining whether a document or material 
contains NSI and, if so, its classification level. However, a source 
document may be used to classify any email or to classify any other 
document that contains NSI outside the Derivative Classifier’s 
jurisdiction or authorized subject areas, or when the Classification

--- page 41 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
Officer or Program Classification Officer has specifically approved its 
use. A source document may be used only if: 
(a)	 The source document is portion marked and 
(b)	 The source document is less than 25 years old and is marked with 
a declassification date or event that has not passed or has been 
exempted from automatic declassification and is marked with a 
declassification date or event that has not passed 
c.	 Classification Authority Block. Upon completion of a classification review, a 
classification authority block containing the following information must appear 
on a document or material that is determined to be classified. 
(1)	 “Classified By” Line. The name or personal identifier and position title 
of the Derivative Classifier and, if not otherwise evident, the agency and 
the office of origin. 
(2)	 “Derived From” Line. 
(a)	 If a guide is used, the short title of the guide, issue date of the 
guide, and agency and, where available, the guide’s office of 
origin. For example, if a DOE guide, CG-SS-4, 9/2000, DOE OC; 
if another agency guide: XYZ Affair, 3/2013, State Dept. 
(b)	 If a source document is used, the identification of the source 
document, the agency of origin and, where available, the office of 
origin, and the date of the source. 
(c)	 If more than one classification guide or source document is used, 
the words “Multiple Sources” may be used, and a source list 
identifying each guide must be included with the document. 
(3)	 “Declassify On” Line. For documents containing NSI only, the 
“Declassify on” line must contain declassification instructions from the 
classification guide or the source document. Note: If the date is 
displayed numerically, the following format must be used: 
YYYYMMDD. If multiple sources are used, the declassification 
instruction with the longest duration must be identified. 
d.	 Special Control Marking. In order to prevent the inadvertent release of RD, 
FRD, or TFNI and to ensure the NSI classification has not been extended, 
documents marked as containing NSI only must have the following special 
control marking applied to the front page. This requirement does not apply to 
intelligence products intended for the Intelligence Community. (For email, the 
block format is not required.)

--- page 42 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4	 10-3-2014
 
Derivative Declassifier 
review required prior to 
declassification 
e.	 Portion Marking Requirements. The following portion marking requirements 
supplement those required by DOE O 471.6, Admin Chg. 1, Information Security. 
(1)	 Documents containing RD or FRD are not required to be portion marked. 
(2)	 Documents containing only TFNI or NSI or both must be portion marked 
as required by E.O. 13526. 
(3)	 Documents containing both RD/FRD and TFNI or NSI are not required to 
be portion marked. 
(a)	 If portion marked: 
1	 the “Declassify On” line must be used and must be 
annotated with “Not Applicable to RD/FRD/TFNI 
portions” and “See source list for NSI portions.” “N/A” 
may be used in lieu of “Not Applicable.” 
2	 for multiple page documents, the source list must not 
appear on the front page of the document. 
3	 the source list must include the longest duration 
declassification instruction for each of the NSI source 
documents cited. 
4	 in the case of a single page document, the NSI source list 
may appear at the bottom of the document, below and 
clearly identified as separate from the classification 
authority block. Alternatively, the declassification 
instruction may be added at the end of each NSI portion. 
(b)	 If not portion marked, the “Declassify On” line and the source list 
containing the NSI declassification instructions must not be used. 
(4)	 Documents prepared for the Intelligence Community must follow portion 
marking requirements of the Intelligence Community. 
(5)	 Documents prepared under a Work-for-Others contract must follow the 
portion marking requirements of the funding organization if specified in 
the contract or those in paragraph 1.e. if not specified in the contract.

--- page 43 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 5
 
f.	 Classification Based on Association and Compilation. Classification 
determinations must take into account the potential for classification by 
association or compilation. 
(1)	 Association. 
(a) Description. Classification by association concerns: 
1	 two or more different, unclassified facts that when 
combined in a specific way result in a classified statement 
or 
2	 two or more different, classified facts or unclassified and 
classified facts that when combined in a specific way 
result in a higher classification level or more restrictive 
category. 
(b)	 Basis for Determination. Associations are classified based on 
existing classification guide topics. 
(c)	 Additional Marking Requirements. If the document containing the 
association is portion marked, then each portion of the associated 
information must be marked at the level (and category if RD, FRD 
or TFNI) of the association. 
(2)	 Compilation. 
(a)	 Description. Classification by compilation occurs at the document 
level when: 
1	 a large number of often similar, unclassified pieces of 
information whose selection, arrangement, or 
completeness in the document adds sufficient value to 
merit classification or 
2	 a large number of often similar classified pieces of 
information or of unclassified and classified pieces of 
information whose selection, arrangement, or 
completeness in the document adds sufficient value to 
merit classifying the document at a higher classification 
level or more restrictive category. 
(b)	 Basis for Determination. Compilations are classified based on: 
1	 classification guide topics, only if such topics exist, or 
2	 a determination by the Director, Office of Classification 
(for RD/FRD/TFNI), or by an Original Classifier (for NSI).

--- page 44 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 6	 10-3-2014 
(c)	 Additional Marking Requirements. A document that is classified 
based on compilation is never portion marked and must contain the 
following statement: 
This document has been classified as a 
compilation and must not be used as a source 
document for a derivative classification decision. 
g.	 Classification of Documents Containing Foreign Government Information. The 
following requirements for documents containing foreign government information 
supplement those required by DOE O 471.6, Admin Chg.1, Information Security. 
(1)	 Document Generated by a Foreign Government. A review by a Derivative 
Classifier is not required to apply a U.S. classification level (i.e., Top 
Secret, Secret, Confidential, or Confidential/Foreign Government 
Information-Modified Handling Authorized) that provides at least an 
equivalent level of protection to a document or material classified by a 
foreign government. However, if the person in possession of the document 
is unsure about the appropriate U.S. classification level, then he or she 
must consult a Derivative Classifier. 
(2)	 Document Generated by the United States. A document generated by the 
U.S. Government that contains foreign government information must be 
reviewed by a Derivative Classifier. 
(3)	 Additional Marking Requirements. If a classification authority block is 
applied, the “Declassify On” line must be annotated with the 
declassification instructions from the classification guide or source 
document used to make the determination. If no declassification 
instructions are available, the Derivative Classifier must consult his or her 
Classification Officer. 
h.	 Inconsistent or No Guidance. If a Derivative Classifier encounters inconsistent 
guidance or cannot determine the proper classification of information using 
guidance approved for his or her use, the Derivative Classifier must contact his or 
her Classification Office for assistance. Pending a determination, the document or 
material must be protected at the more restrictive level and category or at the 
highest potential level and category. 
2.	 DECLASSIFICATION. Classified documents or material must be reviewed for 
declassification by the appropriate official. 
a.	 Required Declassification Reviews. 
(1)	 A classified document that is being prepared for declassification in full 
must be reviewed by two individuals knowledgeable in the subject area, 
except as provided in 2.a(5)(a). The first review may be conducted either 
by a Derivative Classifier or a Derivative Declassifier; the second review

--- page 45 ---
DOE O 475.2B 
10-3-2014 
Attachment 4 
Page 7 
must be conducted by a Derivative Declassifier (other than the first 
reviewer). 
(2) A classified document that is being prepared as a redacted version must be 
reviewed as described in paragraph 2.a.(1) and must clearly indicate that it 
is a redacted version. 
(3) A classified document that is requested under statute or Executive order 
must be reviewed in accordance with Attachment 7, Freedom of 
Information Act/Privacy Act and Mandatory Declassification Review 
Requirements. 
(4) A document referred to DOE for declassification review by another 
Government agency that is marked as containing or identified as 
potentially containing RD, FRD, or TFNI must be reviewed as described 
in paragraph 2.a.(1). 
(5) An NSI document or material that is: 
(a) Marked for declassification with a specific date or event that has 
passed must be reviewed by a Derivative Declassifier (single 
review only) prior to actual declassification to ensure that the 
document or material does not contain classified information; 
(b) Marked with one of the following declassification instructions: 
Group 1, Group 2, or Group 3 (from E.O. 10501); “Exempt from 
General Declassification Schedule” (from E.O. 11652); “Review 
for Declassification on date indicated” (from E.O. 12065); 
“Originating Agency’s Determination Required” (from 
E.O.12356); or “Declassify on: Xn” (where n is a number between 
1 and 8) (from E.O. 12958) must be reviewed in accordance with 
paragraph 2.a.(1); 
(c) Not marked for declassification with a specific date or event that 
has passed or with one of the markings identified in paragraph 
2.a.(5)(b) must be reviewed in accordance with paragraph 2.a.(1); 
or 
(d) A permanent historical record that is 25 years old or older must be 
reviewed in accordance with paragraphs 2.a.(5)(a), (b), and (c) 
above, as appropriate. 
(6) Documents that were declassified but not publicly released during the 
Comprehensive Classification Review Program must be reviewed by a 
Derivative Declassifier (single review only) to ensure that they do not 
contain classified information. Such documents were declassified between 
1971 and 1978 and may include the following or similar markings:

--- page 46 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 8	 10-3-2014
 
CLASSIFICATION CANCELED 
OR CHANGED TO 
BY AUTHORITY OF DOC 
BY John Doe DATE 3/20/73 
(7)	 Documents dated prior to December 15, 1953, and marked as “Restricted” 
and documents dated from July 18, 1949, through October 22, 1951, and 
marked as “Official Use Only” must be reviewed by a Derivative 
Declassifier or a Derivative Classifier (single review only). Until the 
review is completed, such documents must be handled and protected as 
Confidential NSI. 
b.	 Basis for Determination. Classification guidance must be used as the basis for 
determining whether a document or material can be declassified. If a Derivative 
Declassifier encounters inconsistent guidance or cannot determine the proper 
classification of an element of information using guidance approved for his or her 
use, the Derivative Declassifier must contact his or her Classification Office for 
assistance. 
c.	 Derivative Declassification Markings. The following Derivative Declassifier 
markings must be placed on the document or material that is declassified: 
(1)	 Names or personal identifiers and positions or titles of individuals 
declassifying the document on the “Declassified By” line. 
(2)	 Short title of the guide, issuance date of the guide, and “DOE OC” (e.g., 
CG-SS-4, 9/2000, DOE OC) on the “Derived From” line. 
(3)	 The date of declassification on the “Declassified On” line. 
(4)	 In addition, existing classification markings that are no longer valid must 
be lined through but not obliterated. 
d.	 Notification. 
(1)	 Required Recipients. The Derivative Declassifier authorizing the 
declassification of a document or material must notify the following 
individuals, providing sufficient information for them to identify the 
specific document or material being declassified: 
(a)	 The originator or custodian of the document or material, if 
identifiable, and 
(b)	 If the document is a scientific or technical report, the Office of 
Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) Classified 
Information Program Manager.

--- page 47 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 9 
(2)	 Time Frame. Notification must be sent within 75 calendar days of the 
declassification. 
(3)	 Additional Recipients. The individuals identified in paragraph 2.d.(1) who 
receive a declassification notification must notify all known holders of the 
document or material that the document or material is being declassified. 
e.	 Changing Classification Markings Based on Receipt of a Declassification Notice. 
The person changing the classification markings on a document based on receipt 
of a declassification notice must include the following information on the front of 
the document: 
(1)	 The word “Declassified” on the “Classification changed to” line. 
(2)	 A brief description of the notice advising of the declassification and its 
date on the “Authorized by” line. 
(3)	 The name of the person making the change on the “Changed by” line. 
(4)	 The date the change is made on the “Date changed” line. 
f.	 Declassified Documents for the OpenNet Data Base. Documents that have been 
declassified and determined eligible to be released to the public must be entered 
into the OpenNet data base managed by OSTI for the Office of Classification. 
Identifying information and, if available, an electronic version of the document 
must be provided. This requirement does not apply to documents declassified 
under sections 3.3 or 3.4 of E.O. 13526. 
3.	 DOWNGRADING AND UPGRADING. When the classification level or category of 
information contained in a document or material is changed by classification guidance, 
the document must be remarked, as appropriate. 
a.	 Downgrading. Documents or material must be downgraded by a Derivative 
Declassifier (single review only) and must be marked with the following: 
(1)	 The downgraded level (and category if RD, FRD, or TFNI). 
(2)	 The name or personal identifier and position or title of the Derivative 
Declassifier authorizing the downgrading on the “Downgraded By” line. 
(3)	 Date of the downgrading on the “Downgraded On” line. 
(4)	 On the “Derived From” line, the short title, issuance date of the guide, and 
“DOE OC” or, if another agency guide is used, the agency and, where 
available, the office of origin (e.g., CG-SS-4, 9/2000, DOE OC or 
CG No. 1, 7/5/2005, Dept. of Good Works, Office of Administration).

--- page 48 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 10	 10-3-2014 
(5)	 If NSI, the duration of classification derived from the guidance on the 
“Declassify On” line. 
(6)	 Portion markings, if required by paragraph 1.e. above. 
(7)	 In addition, the existing classification markings that are no longer valid 
must be lined through but not obliterated. 
b.	 Upgrading. Documents or material must be upgraded by a Derivative Classifier 
and must be marked with the following: 
(1)	 The upgraded level (and category if RD, FRD, or TFNI). 
(2)	 The name or personal identifier and position or title of the Derivative 
Classifier authorizing the upgrading on the “Upgraded By” line. 
(3)	 The date of the upgrading on the “Upgraded On” line. 
(4)	 On the “Derived From” line, the short title, issuance date of the guide, 
and“DOE OC” or, if another agency guide is used, the agency and, where 
available, the office of origin (e.g., CG-SS-4, 9/2000, DOE OC or 
CG No. 1, 7/5/2005, Dept. of Good Works, Office of Administration). 
(5)	 If NSI, include the duration of classification derived from the guidance on 
the “Declassify On” line. 
(6)	 Portion markings, if required by paragraph 1.e. above. 
(7)	 In addition, the existing classification markings that are no longer valid 
must be lined through but not obliterated. 
c.	 Notification. 
(1)	 Required Recipients. The Derivative Declassifier or Derivative Classifier 
authorizing the downgrading or upgrading of a document or material must 
notify the following individuals, providing sufficient information for them 
to identify the specific document or material being downgraded or 
upgraded: 
(a)	 The originator or custodian of the document or material, if 
identifiable, 
(b)	 If the document is a scientific or technical report, the OSTI 
Classified Information Program Manager, and 
(c)	 For upgrades, the cognizant Classification Officer. 
(2)	 Time Frame. Notification must be sent within 75 calendar days of the 
downgrading or upgrading action.

--- page 49 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 11 
(3)	 Additional Requirements for Downgrading/Upgrading Actions That 
Result in a Change to the TFNI or NSI Category. 
(a)	 If downgrading results in a change from the RD or FRD category 
to the TFNI or NSI category, then portion marking instructions for 
the TFNI and NSI in the document must be included in the 
notification, and declassification instructions must be included for 
the NSI. 
(b)	 If upgrading results in a change from unclassified to TFNI or NSI, 
then portion marking instructions for the TFNI and NSI in the 
document must be included in the notification, and declassification 
instructions must be included for the NSI. 
(4)	 Additional Recipients. The individuals identified in paragraphs 3.c.(1) 
must notify all known holders of the document or material that the 
document has been downgraded or upgraded. Note: For upgrade notices 
the recipient must have the appropriate access authorization. 
d.	 Changing Classification Markings based on Receipt of a Downgrading or 
Upgrading Notice. The person changing the classification markings on a 
document based on receipt of a downgrading or upgrading notice must include the 
following information on the front of the document: 
(1)	 The appropriate classification level (and category if RD, FRD, or TFNI) 
on the “Classification Changed to” line. 
(2)	 A brief description of the notice advising of the change in classification 
and its date on the “Authorized By” line (e.g., Change Notice 138, 
8/31/06). 
(3)	 The name of the person making the change on the “Changed By” line. 
(4)	 The date the change is made on the “Date Changed” line. 
(5)	 If a downgrading action resulted in a change from the RD or FRD 
category to the TFNI or NSI category: 
(a)	 The declassification instructions for the NSI described in the 
notification on the “Declassify On” line and 
(b)	 The appropriate portion markings (throughout the document). 
(6)	 If an upgrading action resulted in a change from unclassified to the TFNI 
or NSI category: 
(a)	 The declassification instructions for the NSI described in the 
notification on the “Declassify On” line, and

--- page 50 ---
Attachment 4	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 12	 10-3-2014 
(b)	 The appropriate portion markings (throughout the document). 
4.	 CHALLENGES. Each employee is encouraged and expected to challenge the 
classification of information, documents, or material that he or she believes is improperly 
classified. Employees are encouraged to resolve classification challenges locally. If the 
challenge cannot be resolved locally, the employee has the right to submit a challenge in 
writing to the Director, Office of Classification. However, every employee has the right 
at any time to submit a challenge in writing directly to the Director, Office of 
Classification. Under no circumstances is the employee subject to retribution for making 
a challenge. 
a.	 The Director, Office of Classification. The Director, Office of Classification, will 
coordinate formal challenges with the cognizant Classification Officer, Program 
Classification Officer, or Headquarters Classification Representative, as 
appropriate, and must respond to the challenger within 60 days of the initial 
receipt of the challenge. Any response that denies a change in the classification 
status of the challenged information, document, or material must include the 
appeal rights of the challenger. 
b.	 Appeals. If an employee is not satisfied with the response to his or her 
classification challenge, he or she may appeal the decision. 
(1)	 NSI Appeals. 
(a)	 The Director, Office of Classification, must respond to an NSI 
challenge within 60 days or notify the challenger if the expected 
response is beyond 60 days. If the response is expected beyond 60 
days, the notification must include the date the response will be 
provided. The notification must also include a statement that if no 
response is received within 120 days, the challenger may forward 
the challenge to ISCAP. 
(b)	 If a challenger is not satisfied with the response from the Director, 
Office of Classification, the employee may appeal to the Associate 
Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security. If 
the information is under NNSA cognizance, the Associate Under 
Secretary will coordinate with the NNSA, Chief of Defense 
Nuclear Security. 
(c)	 If there is no response to an appeal to the Associate Under 
Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security within 90 
days or the employee is not satisfied with the response from the 
Associate Under Secretary, the employee may forward the 
challenge to the ISCAP.

--- page 51 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 4
 
10-3-2014	 Page 13 (and Page 14) 
(d)	 If an NSI document also containing RD, FRD, or TFNI is appealed 
to ISCAP, the RD, FRD or TFNI must be removed prior to 
submission to ISCAP. 
(2)	 RD/FRD/TFNI Appeals. If the person making the challenge is not 
satisfied with the response from the Director, Office of Classification, the 
employee may appeal to the Associate Under Secretary for Environment, 
Health, Safety and Security. RD/FRD and TFNI appeals are not subject to 
review by ISCAP. If the information is under NNSA cognizance, the 
Associate Under Secretary will coordinate with the NNSA, Chief of 
Defense Nuclear Security. 
5.	 DECLASSIFICATION PROPOSALS. Each employee is encouraged and expected to 
submit proposals to declassify information the employee believes no longer requires 
protection. Declassification proposals must be submitted in writing and must include a 
description of the information concerned and a reason for the request. Declassification 
proposals may be submitted to the proposer’s Classification Officer or Program 
Classification Officer or directly to the Director, Office of Classification, who will 
coordinate the declassification proposal with the appropriate officials. 
6.	 MISCLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION, DOCUMENTS, OR MATERIAL. 
a.	 Any knowing, willful, or negligent action that results in the misclassification of 
information, documents, or material may result in termination of the classification 
official’s authority. Additional consequences such as disciplinary action or the 
issuance of a security infraction may result in accordance with other DOE 
directives. Examples of knowing, willful, or negligent actions include classifying 
without authority, classifying outside of granted authority, and failing to obtain a 
classification review when required to do so. Such actions do not include cases 
where classification officials legitimately disagree about the reasonable 
interpretation of classification guidance. 
b.	 Classification officials with appropriate authority who misclassify documents or 
material must not face penalties as long as such determinations are within their 
authority and are based on reasonable interpretations of guidance.

--- page 52 ---


--- page 53 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 5
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
CLASSIFICATION PROGRAM EVALUATIONS
 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 SELF-ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS. 
a.	 Coverage. 
(1)	 Program Classification Officers. 
(a) Each Program Classification Officer must conduct: 
1	 a self-assessment of his or her Headquarters element and 
2	 an evaluation of the classification programs of any 
subordinate field elements and contractors with 
Classification Officers. This evaluation may be 
accomplished by: 
a	 conducting separate on-site evaluations; 
b	 participating in on-site evaluations conducted by the 
Office of Classification or self-assessments 
conducted by subordinate Classification Officers; or 
c	 reviewing and analyzing self-assessment, 
classification decision review, and corrective action 
reports of subordinate organizations. However, this 
option may not be used for consecutive 
evaluations. 
(b)	 In addition, each Program Classification Officer must submit an 
overall assessment of the classification program under his or her 
cognizance to the Office of Classification at least once every 2 
years. 
(2)	 Field Element Classification Officers. 
(a)	 Each Field Element Classification Officer must conduct a self-
assessment of his or her element. 
(b)	 Each Field Element Classification Officer must conduct an 
evaluation of any subordinate contractors with Classification 
Officers. This evaluation may be accomplished by 
1 conducting separate on-site evaluations;

--- page 54 ---
Attachment 5	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
2	 participating in on-site evaluations conducted by the 
Office of Classification; or 
3	 reviewing and analyzing self-assessment, classification 
decision review, and corrective action reports of 
subordinate Classification Officers. 
(3)	 Contractor Classification Officers. Each Contractor Classification Officer 
must conduct a self-assessment of his or her classification program and of 
any subordinate contractors that do not have a Classification Officer. The 
Contractor Classification Officer must also evaluate any subordinate 
contractor that has a Classification Officer. 
(4)	 Headquarters Classification Representatives. Each Headquarters 
Classification Representative must conduct a self-assessment of the 
classification program within his or her organization. 
b.	 Coordination of Self-Assessment and Evaluation Schedules. For efficiency, 
Program Classification Officers and Field Element and Contractor Classification 
Officers should coordinate the scheduling of self-assessments and evaluations 
with the subordinate organizations being assessed to the maximum extent 
practical. 
c.	 Self-Assessments and Evaluations of Multiple Subordinate Organizations. Self-
assessments and evaluations by Program Classification Officers and Field 
Element and Contractor Classification Officers responsible for evaluating 
multiple subordinate organizations may be completed in a single evaluation or in 
multiple evaluations at different times during the 2-year period, as determined by 
the Program Classification Officer or Field Element or Contractor Classification 
Officer and in accordance with paragraph 1.b above. 
d.	 Frequency. A self-assessment or an evaluation must be conducted every 2 years. 
e.	 Scope. 
(1)	 Self-assessments and evaluations must determine how well the 
requirements contained in E.O. 13526, 32 CFR part 2001, 10 CFR part 
1045, and this Order and CRD are being implemented by examining the 
following areas: 
(a)	 Classification Officials: organization has an adequate number and 
appropriate distribution; authority descriptions are accurate and 
adhered to. 
(b)	 Classification Guidance and Procedures: classification guidance is 
up to date; Derivative Classifiers and Derivative Declassifiers have 
access to appropriate guidance; guidance for DOE contracts that 
generate classified information and for classified non-DOE-funded

--- page 55 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 5
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
work is certified by the Classification Officer; locally issued 
classification procedures are consistent with National and DOE 
directives. 
(c)	 Classification Decisions: classification decision reviews are 
conducted in accordance with paragraph 2, Classification Decision 
Review Requirements, and may be completed as part of the self-
assessment or as a separate activity. 
(d)	 Training: training requirements are met; training materials are 
accurate and up to date when presented. Note: Headquarters 
Classification Representatives are only responsible for evaluating 
training generated by his or her Headquarters program. 
(e)	 Program Evaluations: self-assessments and evaluations were 
conducted as required and covered all required areas; accuracy of 
classification decision reviews was evaluated; previous 
deficiencies or issues identified, the corrective actions taken, and 
the effectiveness of those corrective actions are evaluated. 
(f)	 Adequate operational awareness of the Program Classification 
Officer, the Classification Officer, or the Headquarters 
Classification Representative is demonstrated by the following 
ways: 
1	 awareness of all existing work involving classified 
information at the site/element, to include classification 
guidance used; 
2	 awareness of any new work involving classified 
information at the site/element, to include the impact of 
the new work on existing projects; 
3	 technical competence and authority within the 
organization to independently conduct self-assessments 
and evaluations at the site/element; 
4	 cognizance of the results of self-assessments conducted of 
special programs for which he or she does not have access 
(e.g., sensitive compartmented information, special access 
programs) to ensure that performance of the work will 
meet all requirements of this Order and CRD. 
(2)	 Self-assessments and evaluations may focus on particular aspects of the 
areas identified in paragraph 1.e.(1). Although each area must be 
evaluated, the classification official conducting the review may determine 
the depth of review for each area based on the nature and extent of

--- page 56 ---
Attachment 5	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4	 10-3-2014 
classified activities to be covered and performance on previous self-
assessments. 
f.	 Reports. 
(1)	 Each self-assessment and evaluation must be documented in a report, 
which must include the following: 
(a)	 A description of how the self-assessment or evaluation was 
conducted, including how the documents were selected for the 
document reviews; 
(b)	 A list of organizations assessed or evaluated; 
(c)	 An evaluation of each program area covered in paragraph 1.e.(1); 
(d)	 Any deficiencies identified during the self-assessment or 
evaluation; and 
(e)	 Any best practices identified during the self-assessment or 
evaluation. 
(2)	 If a portion of the self-assessment or evaluation was completed as part of a 
security survey or another required report, the report may cite the report 
that fulfills the requirement and attach the appropriate information to the 
report submitted. 
g.	 Submittal of Reports. 
(1)	 Reports must be submitted to the Director, Office of Classification, 
through the Field Element and Program Classification Officer, as 
appropriate, within 60 days of the completion of the evaluation or self-
assessment. Classification Decision Review reports may be submitted 
separately in accordance with paragraph 2, Classification Decision Review 
Requirements. 
(2)	 Program Classification Officers and Field Element Classification Officers 
must evaluate, endorse, and forward self-assessment and evaluation 
reports received from subordinate Classification Officers to the Director, 
Office of Classification, within 30 days of receiving the report. 
(3)	 Each Program Classification Officer must submit a report describing the 
overall assessment of the classification program under his or her 
cognizance to the Office of Classification within 30 days of completing 
the overall assessment.

--- page 57 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 5
 
10-3-2014	 Page 5 
2.	 CLASSIFICATION DECISION REVIEW REQUIREMENTS. 
a.	 Coverage. Each Program Classification Officer, Field Element and Contractor 
Classification Officer, and Headquarters Classification Representative must 
conduct a review of classification decisions (including varying types of classified 
and unclassified documents or material) within his or her Headquarters program, 
field element, or contractor. 
b.	 Scope. Classification decision reviews must assess that original and derivative 
classification decisions are accurate; decisions are made by classification officials 
acting within their granted authorities; and classification markings are correct. 
c.	 Frequency. Classification decision reviews must be conducted annually. The 
review may be conducted separately or as part of the biennial self-assessment. 
d.	 Methodology for Determining Representative Sample. At a minimum, the review 
must include a proportionally sufficient, representative sample of the 
organization’s classified documents. The sample size of classified products must 
be determined by the official conducting the review using standard statistical 
methods (e.g., ISO 2859, ANSI Z1.4). In addition to the classified documents, a 
comparable number of unclassified documents (including documents containing 
Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information and Official Use Only) in a 
classified subject area must be reviewed. 
e.	 Report. Each review must be documented in a report. The format for the report 
will be provided by the Office of Classification based on requirements identified 
by ISOO. The report must include the following: 
(1)	 The number of derivatively classified documents reviewed by type (e.g., 
RD, TFNI, FRD, NSI); 
(2)	 The number of unclassified documents in classified subject areas 
reviewed; and 
(3)	 The number of errors that were found by type (e.g., over or under 
classification, erroneous classification decisions, specific types of marking 
errors, incorrect declassification instructions). 
f.	 Submittal of Report. Each report must be submitted to the Director, Office of 
Classification, through the Field Element and Program Classification Officer, as 
appropriate, within 60 days of the completion of the review. The Field Element 
Classification Officer and Program Classification Officer must forward the report 
and analysis to the Director, Office of Classification, within 30 days of receipt. 
3.	 CORRECTIVE ACTIONS. Corrective actions identified as a result of a self-assessment 
or evaluation must be documented in a written report. 
a.	 Contents of Report. The written report must include the following:

--- page 58 ---
Attachment 5	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 6	 10-3-2014 
(1)	 A list of deficiencies identified; 
(2)	 Corrective actions that have been taken or are planned to address 
deficiencies; and 
(3)	 A timeline for completing the corrective actions. 
b.	 Submittal of Report. Each report must be submitted to the Director, Office of 
Classification, through the Field Element and Program Classification Officer, as 
appropriate, within 60 days of the completion of the review. The Field Element 
Classification Officer and Program Classification Officer must forward the report 
and analysis to the Director, Office of Classification, within 30 days of receipt. 
4.	 AGENCY SELF-INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS UNDER 10 CFR PART 1045 and 
32 CFR PART 2001. 
a.	 Evaluation of Implementation of DOE’s Classification Program . The Director, 
Office of Classification, meets the agency-wide self-inspection requirements in 
10 CFR § 1045.4(4) and 32 CFR § 2001.60 by conducting on-site evaluations. To 
the maximum extent practical, such on-site evaluations will be in concert and 
coordination with line management oversight to determine the effectiveness of the 
implementation of DOE’s classification program by the programs, field and 
Headquarters elements, and their contractors. 
b.	 Compilation of Evaluation Reports. The Director, Office of Classification, must 
compile and analyze self-assessment, evaluation, and classification decision 
review reports received from Program Classification Officers, Field Element and 
Contractor Classification Officers, Headquarters Classification Representatives, 
and other DOE inspecting organizations to meet external reporting requirements 
in 32 CFR § 2001.60(f)(2). To preclude redundant oversight activities, the 
Director, Office of Classification, will utilize information from other 
Headquarters oversight activities, when possible. 
c.	 Report. The Director, Office of Classification, must annually prepare a report 
based on the results of the evaluations in paragraph 4.a. and the analysis in 
paragraph 4.b. and submit it to the ISOO.

--- page 59 ---
DOE O 475.2B Attachment 6 
10-3-2014 Page 1 
CLASSIFICATION EDUCATION PROGRAM 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 CLASSIFICATION AWARENESS BRIEFINGS FOR EMPLOYEES AUTHORIZED 
ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED INFORMATION. Classification awareness briefings for 
employees authorized access to classified information must meet the following 
requirements: 
a.	 Frequency. Employees must receive an initial classification awareness briefing 
when they are first authorized access to classified information and annually 
thereafter. 
b.	 Coverage. At a minimum, the following areas must be covered: 
(1)	 Where to go for assistance with classification-related issues. 
(2)	 When an employee must have a document or material reviewed for 
classification and which classification official must conduct the review. 
(3)	 When an employee must have a document or material reviewed for 
declassification and which classification official must conduct the review. 
(4)	 Basic information on DOE’s “no comment” policy concerning classified 
information in the public domain. 
(5)	 Responsibility to challenge classification decisions, where to find 
procedures for classification challenges, and who to contact if he or she 
decides to challenge a classification decision. 
(6)	 Other pertinent information as determined by the Classification Officer. 
c.	 Testing. No testing is required. 
2.	 CLASSIFICATION TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR CLASSIFICATION 
OFFICIALS. The training for classification officials must meet the following 
requirements: 
a.	 Original Classifier. 
(1)	 Frequency. Each Original Classifier must receive training at least once a 
calendar year. 
(2)	 Coverage. At a minimum, the following areas must be covered: 
(a)	 Basic information on classification standards and levels.

--- page 60 ---
Attachment 6	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014
 
(b)	 A description of original classification authority and the categories 
under which DOE information can be originally classified. 
(c)	 The prohibitions and limitations on originally classifying 
information. 
(d)	 Requirements for determining how long to classify information 
being considered for original classification. 
(e)	 Requirements for marking an originally classified document. 
(f)	 Requirements for reporting an original classification determination 
to the Director, Office of Classification. 
(g)	 Those aspects of the classification challenge process that affect an 
Original Classifier. 
(h)	 A description of DOE’s classification guidance-based system and 
the role of original classification within DOE. 
(i)	 A brief explanation of declassification and which officials may 
declassify information and documents or material. 
(j)	 Sanctions for improper use of original classification authority. 
(k)	 The importance of avoiding over-classification and of considering 
information sharing needs when making an original classification 
determination. 
(3)	 Testing. Testing is not required. 
b.	 Derivative Classifier. 
(1)	 Frequency. Each Derivative Classifier must receive initial training prior to 
appointment and retraining every 2 years thereafter. 
(2)	 Coverage. At a minimum, the following areas must be covered in both the 
initial training and the retraining: 
(a)	 Basic information on classification levels and categories. 
(b)	 A description of derivative classification authority, including the 
use of subject areas, jurisdiction, and limitations. 
(c)	 Instructions for using classification guidance to make a derivative 
classification determination, including how to determine the 
duration of classification for a document or material being 
considered for derivative classification as NSI.

--- page 61 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 6
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
(d)	 Requirements for marking a derivatively classified document or 
material. 
(e)	 A brief description of upgrading and the requirements for 
upgrading documents or material. 
(f)	 Basic information on the proper use and marking of working 
papers. 
(g)	 A brief explanation of declassification and which officials may 
declassify documents or material. 
(h)	 Responsibility to challenge classification decisions, where to find 
procedures for classification challenges, and who to contact if he 
or she decides to challenge a classification decision. 
(i)	 The prohibitions and limitations on derivatively classifying 
documents or material. 
(j)	 Sanctions for improper use of derivative classification authority. 
(k)	 The importance of avoiding over-classification and of considering 
information sharing needs when making a derivative classification 
determination. 
(l)	 Classification lessons learned during previous self-assessments. 
(3)	 Testing. 
(a)	 Initial Training. Testing includes an examination covering the 
areas in paragraph 2.b.(2) and, at the discretion of the appointing 
official, practical exercises using actual or simulated classification 
guidance and documents. 
(b)	 Retraining. The need for and content of testing during retraining 
are determined by the appointing official. 
c.	 Derivative Declassifier. 
(1)	 Frequency. Each Derivative Declassifier must receive initial training prior 
to appointment and retraining every 2 years thereafter. 
(2)	 Coverage. At a minimum, the following areas must be covered in both the 
initial training and the retraining: 
(a)	 A description of derivative declassification authority and of DOE’s 
requirement to use classification guidance as the basis for making a 
derivative declassification determination.

--- page 62 ---
Attachment 6	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4	 10-3-2014
 
(b)	 The coordination required before declassifying a document or 
material. 
(c)	 The proper procedure for bracketing and redacting classified 
information from a classified document. 
(d)	 Requirements for marking a derivatively declassified document or 
material. 
(e)	 A brief description of downgrading and the requirements for 
downgrading documents or material. 
(f)	 Declassification lessons learned during previous self-assessments. 
(3)	 Testing. 
(a)	 Initial Training. Testing includes an examination covering the 
areas in paragraph 2.c.(2) and practical exercises using actual or 
simulated classification guidance and documents. 
(b)	 Retraining. Testing must include examinations provided by the 
Office of Classification that cover the areas in paragraph 2.c.(2). 
d.	 Program Classification Officer and Classification Officer. 
(1)	 Frequency. Each Program Classification Officer and Classification Officer 
must receive initial training within 6 months of being appointed and 
complete the Office of Classification’s policy refresher at least once every 
2 years. 
(2)	 Training Waiver. The requirement for initial training may be waived if the 
nominated employee has completed the training and examination in the past. 
(3)	 Coverage of Initial Training. Initial training for the position of Program 
Classification Officer or Classification Officer must cover the elements for 
a Derivative Classifier and a Derivative Declassifier and the following: 
(a)	 The bases for classifying RD, FRD, and TFNI. 
(b)	 The basis for classifying NSI. 
(c)	 Classification authorities and responsibilities of DOE officials. 
(d)	 Fundamentals of an effective classification program. 
(4)	 Testing for Initial Training: Testing includes an examination covering the 
areas in 2.d.(3). A score of at least 80 percent is required for passing the 
examination.

--- page 63 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 6
 
10-3-2014	 Page 5 (and Page 6)
 
e.	 Headquarters Classification Representative and Alternate Headquarters 
Classification Representatives . 
(1)	 Frequency. Headquarters Classification Representatives and Alternate 
Headquarters Classification Representatives must receive initial training 
within 2 months of being appointed and complete the Office of 
Classification’s policy refresher at least once every 2 years. 
(2)	 Coverage. Initial training for the position of Headquarters Classification 
Representative must cover Headquarters Classification Representative 
responsibilities. 
(3)	 Testing for Initial Training. Testing includes an examination covering the 
responsibilities of the Headquarters Classification Representative. A score 
of at least 80 percent is required for passing the examination.

--- page 64 ---


--- page 65 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 7
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT/PRIVACY ACT
 
AND MANDATORY DECLASSIFICATION REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT/PRIVACY ACT REVIEWS. Classified 
documents identified as being responsive to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or 
Privacy Act request must be reviewed to identify the classified information in the 
document that must be redacted prior to release. 
a.	 Review of Responsive Classified Documents. Each responsive classified 
document must be reviewed by a Derivative Classifier or Derivative Declassifier 
who identifies and brackets each portion of the document, if any, that contains 
classified information as described in Attachment 8, Bracketing and Redaction 
Procedures, and determines whether the document contains classified information 
outside of the element’s or contractor’s purview. 
(1)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Does Not Contain 
Classified or Potentially Classified Information. 
(a)	 Field Element or Contractor. The Classification Officer must 
conduct a second review and declassify the document. The 
document is then processed in accordance with appropriate 
statutes, regulations, and local procedures. 
(b)	 Headquarters Element or Headquarters Element Contractor . The 
document must be forwarded to the Office of Classification or the 
NNSA Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, through the 
Headquarters Classification Representative if a contractor, for a 
second review. 
(2)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Contains Classified 
Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview. The document 
must be forwarded to the Office of Classification for a second review. 
(3)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Contains Classified 
Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview and Potentially 
Classified Information Outside of the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview. 
The document must be forwarded to the Office of Classification for a 
second review and with the indication that the document may contain 
classified information under the purview of another DOE field or 
Headquarters element or contractor or other Government Agency. 
(4)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Does Not Contain 
Classified Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview but 
Contains Potentially Classified Information Outside of the Element’s or

--- page 66 ---
Attachment 7	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
Contractor’s Purview. The document must be forwarded to the Office of 
Classification with the indication that the document does not contain 
classified information under the element’s or contractor’s purview but 
may contain classified information under the purview of another DOE 
field or Headquarters element or contractor or other Government Agency. 
b. Office of Classification Review and Processing. The Office of Classification: 
(1)	 Conducts the second review to validate or modify the brackets identifying 
the portions of the document containing the classified information or to 
declassify the document, as required. 
(2)	 Coordinates the review of the document with any other DOE field or 
Headquarters element or contractor or other Government Agency, as 
appropriate. 
(3)	 Coordinates the review with the NNSA Classification Officer, as 
appropriate. 
(4)	 Identifies the appropriate Denying Official and exemption for each portion 
of the document that was bracketed as a result of the Office of 
Classification review or any coordinate review. The document is then 
returned to the field or Headquarters element for identifying unclassified 
information that is exempt from release (e.g., Export Controlled 
Information, proprietary information) and processing in accordance with 
appropriate statutes, regulations, and local procedures. 
c.	 OpenNet. Once the classified and unclassified information exempt from public 
release is redacted, the document must be entered into the OpenNet data base by 
the responsible program. 
2.	 MANDATORY DECLASSIFICATION REVIEW. Each classified document identified 
as being responsive to a mandatory declassification review request under Executive 
Order 13526 or 10 CFR § 1045.42 must be reviewed to identify the classified information 
and unclassified information that is exempt from release in the document that must be 
redacted prior to release. 
a.	 Identification of Responsive Documents. 
(1)	 The Office of Classification must identify field and Headquarters elements 
and contractors that potentially have documents responsive to the request 
and must forward the request to those elements or contractors. 
(2)	 Each element or contractor must search for and identify classified 
documents in its possession that are responsive to the request and must 
notify the Office of Classification of the results of the search within 
14 days of receiving the request.

--- page 67 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 7
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
b.	 Classification Review of Responsive Documents. Each responsive classified 
document must be reviewed by a Derivative Classifier or Derivative Declassifier 
who identifies and brackets each portion of the document, if any, that contains 
classified information as described in Attachment 8, Bracketing and Redaction 
Procedures, and determines whether the document contains classified information 
outside of the element’s or contractor’s purview. 
(1)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Does Not Contain 
Classified or Potentially Classified Information. 
(a)	 Field Element or Contractor. The Classification Officer must 
conduct a second review and declassify the document. The 
document is then forwarded to the Office of Classification, through 
the Field Element Classification Officer if a contractor. 
(b)	 Headquarters Element or Headquarters Element Contractor . The 
document must be forwarded to the Office of Classification or the 
NNSA Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, through the 
Headquarters Classification Representative if a contractor, for a 
second review. 
(2)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Contains Classified 
Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview. The document 
must be forwarded to the Office of Classification for a second review of 
the classified information. 
(3)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Contains Classified 
Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview and Potentially 
Classified Information Outside of the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview. 
The document must be forwarded to the Office of Classification for a 
second review and with the indication that the document may contain 
classified information under the purview of another DOE field or 
Headquarters element or contractor or other Government Agency. 
(4)	 If the First Reviewer Determines the Document Does Not Contain 
Classified Information under the Element’s or Contractor’s Purview, but 
Contains Potentially Classified Information Outside of the Element’s or 
Contractor’s Purview. The document must be forwarded to the Office of 
Classification with the indication that the document does not contain 
classified information under the element’s or contractor’s purview but 
may contain classified information under the purview of another DOE 
field or Headquarters element or contractor or other Government Agency. 
c.	 Review for Unclassified Information That is Exempt from Release in Responsive 
Documents. Prior to forwarding responsive documents to the Office of 
Classification or the NNSA Program Classification Officer, as appropriate, the 
unclassified information that is exempt from release must be identified along

--- page 68 ---
Attachment 7	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 4	 10-3-2014 
with any appropriate exemption categories and Denying Officials in accordance 
with statutes, regulations, DOE Orders, and local procedures. The response must 
also confirm that the document is cleared for public release when the classified 
and unclassified information that is exempt from release (e.g., Export Controlled 
Information, proprietary information) is redacted. 
d. Office of Classification Review and Processing. The Office of Classification: 
(1)	 Conducts the second review to validate or modify the brackets identifying 
the portions of the document containing the classified information or to 
declassify the document, as required. 
(2)	 Coordinates the review of the document with any other DOE field or 
Headquarters element or contractor or other Government agency, as 
appropriate. 
(3)	 Coordinates the review with the NNSA Classification Officer, as 
appropriate. 
(4)	 Identifies the appropriate Denying Official and exemption for each 
bracketed portion of the document. 
(5)	 Prepares a redacted version of the document, removing all portions of the 
document containing classified information and unclassified information 
that is exempt from release (e.g., Export Controlled Information, 
proprietary information) 
(6)	 Responds to the requester. 
(7)	 Enters the redacted document into the OpenNet data base.

--- page 69 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 8
 
10-3-2014	 Page 1
 
BRACKETING AND REDACTION PROCEDURES
 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 BRACKETING. Bracketing is the process by which classified portions of a document are 
identified by the appropriate classification officials. 
a.	 Classified Information. Classified information in a document must be bracketed 
so as to preclude reconstructing the classified information within the brackets 
after it has been redacted. 
b.	 Unclassified Information. Unclassified information in proximity to classified 
information may be included within a bracket if such inclusion is required to 
prevent reconstruction of the classified information in the bracketed portion. 
Otherwise, unclassified information that is not inextricably intertwined with 
classified information must not be included within a bracket identifying classified 
information. 
c.	 Bracketing Procedures. The following procedures must be followed when 
bracketing information: 
(1)	 Bracketing must unambiguously identify portions (e.g., sentences, column 
of a chart) of a document that contain classified information. Bracketing 
can be done in a number of ways; for example, with brackets – [ . . . ], 
parentheses – (. . . ), or by drawing boxes around each classified portion. 
(2)	 To allow differences between the first and second reviewer to be easily 
resolved, an erasable pencil must be used to make the brackets on paper 
documents. For electronic documents, any method may be used that 
clearly identifies each portion of the document containing classified 
information as long as the method is reversible. 
(3)	 In cases where reviewers are required to annotate applicable classification 
guide topic numbers adjacent to the bracketed portions, the topic numbers 
must also be included in the brackets to preclude their release. 
(4)	 If the citation to the legal basis for denial of the bracketed portion is 
indicated near the bracketed portion and if this legal basis is intended to be 
released, the citation must not be included in the brackets. 
(5)	 Other-Agency brackets must be copied exactly without expansion and the 
denying agency and exemption identified. 
2.	 REDACTION. Redaction is the process by which bracketed portions in a document are 
irretrievably removed so as to allow the release of the document to a person not 
authorized access to classified information.

--- page 70 ---
Attachment 8	 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2	 10-3-2014 
a.	 Redaction Procedures for Paper Documents. 
(1)	 When redacting classified information from paper documents, the preparer 
must: 
(a)	 Make a copy of the bracketed version of the document. 
(b)	 Redact the copy by physically removing the bracketed portions of 
the document. 
(c)	 Destroy the cut-out classified portions using any classified 
document destruction methods approved by the local security 
office. 
(d)	 After the bracketed information has been irretrievably removed, 
line through all classification markings that are no longer valid 
(e.g., classification level and category, classification authority 
block). 
(e)	 Make a copy of each page of the redacted version. 
(f)	 When the redacted version is prepared in response to a request 
from the public (e.g., a FOIA or Mandatory Declassification 
Review request), indicate the extent of the deletion in places where 
information has been deleted if technically feasible. This paragraph 
does not apply to documents requested for litigation. 
(g)	 Ensure that the redacted version of the document clearly indicates 
that it is a redacted version. If the original document had a unique 
report number, then a new number must be assigned to the 
redacted version. 
(h)	 Make a copy of the redacted version. 
(i)	 Ensure that another person compares the redacted version with the 
bracketed version to verify that all the bracketed portions of the 
document have been redacted, classification markings have been 
lined out, and any additional required markings have been applied. 
(2)	 A paper redacted version may also be produced using redaction software. 
b.	 Redaction Procedures for Documents in Electronic Files. If a final electronic copy 
of a redacted document is required, the following method is approved. The 
preparer must scan the redacted paper copy of the document and save it as a 
portable document format (PDF) file. This PDF file is the final electronic redacted 
version and may be distributed and released as desired.

--- page 71 ---
DOE O 475.2B Attachment 9 
10-3-2014 Page 1 
DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as 
well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated 
CRD (Attachment 1 to this Order) is inserted. 
1.	 DEFINITIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING DOE CLASSIFICATION PROGRAM. 
E.O. 13526, 32 CFR part 2001, and 10 CFR part 1045 contain definitions of terms 
used in this Order and CRD that are necessary for implementing the DOE 
classification program. These definitions must be consulted when appropriate. 
2.	 DEFINITIONS UNIQUE TO DOE CLASSIFICATION PROGRAM. The 
following definitions are unique to the DOE classification program: 
a.	 Classification. The act or process by which information or documents or material 
are determined to require protection in the interest of national security under the 
Atomic Energy Act, 10 CFR part 1045, or E.O. 13526. 
b.	 Classification Guidance. Written, detailed instructions (usually concerning a 
system, plan, project, or program) that explicitly identify whether specific 
information is classified and, if classified, such instructions identify the level and 
category (and duration if NSI). 
c.	 Classification Officer. An individual who has been appointed in accordance with 
Attachment 2, 2b, of this Order to manage a classification program. 
(1)	 Headquarters Classification Officer. The DOE Office of Classification (for 
DOE elements, not including NNSA) or the NNSA Program Classification 
Officer (for NNSA). 
(2)	 Field Element Classification Officer. A Federal employee designated to 
administer the classification program for that particular field element and 
to monitor the classification programs of contractors under its cognizance. 
(3)	 Contractor Classification Officer. An individual designated to administer 
the classification program for that particular contractor and to monitor the 
classification programs of subcontractors under its cognizance. 
d.	 Classified Information. Information that is classified by statute or Executive 
order. Such information includes: 
(1)	 RD or FRD classified by the Atomic Energy Act or 10 CFR part 1045, 
(2)	 TFNI classified by the Atomic Energy Act, and 
(3)	 NSI classified by E.O. 13526 or prior Executive orders.

--- page 72 ---
Attachment 9 DOE O 475.2B
 
Page 2 10-3-2014 
e. Classified Subject Area. A subject area for which classification guidance is 
issued. 
f. Declassification. A determination by an appropriate authority that information no 
longer warrants classification or that documents or material no longer contain 
classified information. 
g. Derivative Classifier. An individual authorized to confirm that an unmarked 
document or material is unclassified or determine that it is classified as allowed 
by his or her description of authority. A Derivative Classifier may also upgrade a 
document or material. (In RD/FRD/TFNI subject areas, a Derivative Classifier is 
equivalent to the Restricted Data Classifier referred to in 10 CFR part 1045.) 
h. Derivative Declassifier. An individual authorized to declassify or downgrade 
documents or material in specified areas as allowed by his or her description of 
authority. 
i. Document. Any recorded information, regardless of the nature of the medium or 
the method or circumstances of recording (e.g., email). 
j. Downgrade. A determination by an appropriate authority that – 
(1) information may be protected at a level lower than the current 
classification level or 
(2) a document or material may be protected at a level and/or category lower 
than the marked classification level and/or category. 
In either case, however, the revised classification level must not be lower 
than Confidential (or for foreign government information, lower than 
Confidential Foreign Government Information-Modified Handling 
Authorized). 
k. Evaluation. Review of a subordinate element with a Classification Officer to 
ensure the subordinate element’s classification program is effective and meets the 
requirements of this Order. 
l. Field Element. A term that includes operations offices, field offices, site offices, 
service centers, project management offices, area offices, and regional offices of 
federally staffed laboratories. 
m. Formerly Restricted Data. Classified information that the DOE or its predecessor 
agencies and the Department of Defense have jointly determined (1) to be related 
primarily to the military utilization of atomic weapons and (2) can be adequately 
safeguarded in a manner similar to NSI. It is also subject to the restrictions on 
transmission to other countries and regional defense organizations that apply to 
RD.

--- page 73 ---
DOE O 475.2B	 Attachment 9
 
10-3-2014	 Page 3 
n.	 Headquarters Classification Representative. An individual who serves as the focal 
point for the classification program in a Headquarters element that has employees 
who generate classified information, documents, or material. 
o.	 Information. Facts, data, or knowledge itself as opposed to the document or 
material in which it is contained or revealed. 
p.	 Mandatory Declassification Review. A declassification review of a specified 
document containing RD/FRD/TFNI information that is requested under 
10 CFR § 1045.42, or a specified document containing NSI that is requested 
under section 3.5 of Executive Order 13526. 
q.	 Material. A product (e.g., a part or a machine) or substance (e.g., a compound or 
an alloy). 
r.	 National Security Information. Information that has been determined, pursuant to 
E.O. 13526 or any predecessor order, to require protection against unauthorized 
disclosure and that is so designated. 
s.	 Original Classifier. A Federal employee authorized to make the initial 
determination that certain information requires protection against unauthorized 
disclosure in the interest of the national security under E.O. 13526; such 
information is identified as NSI. 
t.	 Program Classification Officer. A Federal employee who oversees and evaluates 
field classification programs under the cognizance of his or her Headquarters 
element. 
u.	 Public Release. The act of making information available to the general public, 
usually through an approved process. Public release includes but is not limited to 
publishing documents on web sites available to the public, information provided 
to Congress, briefings to audiences that include members of the public, and 
Freedom of Information Act releases. 
v.	 Restricted Data. All data concerning the design, manufacture, or use of nuclear 
weapons; production of special nuclear material; or use of special nuclear material 
in the production of energy except for data declassified or removed from the RD 
category pursuant to section 142 of the Atomic Energy Act. 
w.	 Self-Assessment. Internal review of the classification program to ensure it is 
effective and in compliance with this Order. 
x.	 Self-Inspection. Evaluation of DOE agency-wide classification program 
conducted by the DOE Office of Classification to meet the requirements of 
E.O. 13526 and 10 CFR part 1045. 
y.	 Source Document. A classified document from which information is extracted 
and included in another document whose classification is derived from the

--- page 74 ---
Attachment 9 DOE O 475.2B 
Page 4 10-3-2014 
classification markings of the individual portions from which the information was 
extracted. 
z.	 Transclassification. The removal of certain information from the RD category 
under section 142 of the Atomic Energy Act to (1) the FRD category based on 
joint determinations between the Department of Energy and the Department of 
Defense or (2) the Transclassified Foreign Nuclear Information category based on 
joint determination by the Department of Energy and the Director of National 
Intelligence (formerly the Director, Central Intelligence Agency) 
aa.	 Transclassified Foreign Nuclear Information. Classified information concerning 
the nuclear energy programs of other nations (including subnational entities) 
removed from the RD category under section 142(e) of the Atomic Energy Act 
after the DOE and the Director of National Intelligence jointly determine that it is 
necessary to carry out intelligence-related activities under the provisions of the 
National Security Act of 1947, as amended, and that it can be adequately 
safeguarded as National Security Information. This includes information removed 
from the RD category by past joint determinations between DOE and the CIA. 
TFNI does not include information transferred to the United States under an 
Agreement for Cooperation under the Atomic Energy Act or any other agreement 
or treaty in which the United States agrees to protect classified information. 
bb.	 Upgrade. A determination by an appropriate authority that raises the classification 
level or category of information, a document, or material to protect the contents 
adequately. This includes correcting the classification level and/or category of a 
document or material that was never marked as well as one erroneously marked as 
unclassified.
