--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT:  INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov  Office of Environmental Management 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
Washington, D.C. 
 
 
Approved: 7-9-99 
Review: 7-9-01 
Change 1: 8-28-01 
Certified: 1-9-07 
Chg 2 (AdminChg): 1-11-2021 
 
SUBJECT: RADIOACTIVE WASTE MANAGEMENT 
1. OBJECTIVE.  The objective of this Order is to ensure that all Department of Energy 
(DOE) radioactive waste is managed in a manner that is protective of worker and public 
health and safety, and the environment. 
2. CANCELLATION.  This Order cancels DOE 5820.2A, RADIOACTIVE WASTE 
MANAGEMENT, dated 9-26-88.  Cancellation of that Order does not, by itself, modify 
or otherwise affect any contractual obligation to comply with the Order.  The provisions 
of this canceled Order which have been incorporated by reference in a contract shall 
remain in effect until the contract is modified. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. DOE Elements. This Order applies to all DOE elements including the National 
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), except as stated in section 3.d. 
b. Radioactive Waste. Except as stated in section 3.d., this Order applies to the 
management of: 
(1) All high-level waste, transuranic waste, and low-level waste, including the 
radioactive component of mixed waste, for which DOE is responsible; 
(2) DOE accelerator-produced radioactive waste; and 
(3) If managed at DOE low-level waste facilities, byproduct materials as 
defined by section 11e.(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 
or naturally occurring radioactive materials. 
c. Contractors. The Contractor Requirements Document, Attachment 1, sets forth 
requirements to be applied to contractors performing work that involves 
management of DOE radioactive waste at DOE-owned or leased facilities.  
Contractor compliance with the Contractor Requirements Document will be 
required to the extent set forth in a contract. 
d. Exemptions. This Order does not apply to certain DOE programs, facilities, or 
activities as described below. 
(1) This Order does not apply to activities conducted under the authority of 
the Director, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, as described in 
DOE O 435.1

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 435.1 
7-9-99 
 
 
Department of Energy National Security and Military Applications of 
Nuclear Energy Authorization Act of 1985, Public Law 98-525. 
(2) Requirements in this Order that overlap or duplicate requirements of the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) related to radiation protection, 
nuclear safety (including quality assurance), and safeguards and security 
of nuclear material, do not apply to the design, construction, operation, 
and decommissioning of Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste 
Management facilities as defined in DOE O 250.1, Civilian Radioactive 
Waste Management Facilities Exemptions from Departmental Orders. 
(3) Requirements in this Order that duplicate or conflict with requirements of 
NRC or an Agreement State do not apply to facilities and activities 
licensed by the NRC or an Agreement State. 
(4) Requirements in this Order that duplicate or conflict with the Waste 
Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Act of 1992, as amended, Public 
Law 102-579, including the U.S. EPA's Possessive Certification of the 
WIPP pursuant to this Act, do not apply to the operation of the Waste 
Isolation Pilot Plant or the disposal of waste therein. 
(5) Unless managed in a low-level waste facility, requirements in this Order 
do not apply to byproduct material as defined in section 11e.(2) of the 
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or naturally occurring radioactive 
material. 
(6) This Order does not apply to either spent nuclear fuel or non-waste 
materials. 
(7) Upon request or on its own initiative, DOE may grant exemptions from 
the requirements of this Order in accordance with the process provided by 
DOE M 251.1-1A, Directives System Manual, as applicable. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. DOE radioactive waste management activities shall be systematically planned, 
documented, executed, and evaluated. 
b. Radioactive waste shall be managed to: 
(1) Protect the public from exposure to radiation from radioactive materials.  
Requirements for public radiation protection are in DOE 5400.5, 
Radiation Protection of the Public and the Environment.  
(2) Protect the environment.  Requirements for environmental protection are 
in DOE 5400.1, General Environmental Protection Program, and DOE 
5400.5, Radiation Protection of the Public and the Environment.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 435.1 3 (and 4) 
7-9-99 
 
 
(3) Protect workers.  Requirements for radiation protection of workers are in 
10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection; requirements for 
industrial safety are in DOE O 440.1A, Worker Protection Management 
for DOE Federal and Contractor Employees. 
(4) Comply with applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.  
These activities shall also comply with applicable Executive Orders and 
other DOE directives. 
c. All radioactive waste shall be managed in accordance with the requirements in 
DOE M 435.1-1, Radioactive Waste Management Manual. 
d. DOE, within its authority, may impose such requirements, in addition to those 
established in this Order, as it deems appropriate and necessary to protect the 
public, workers, and the environment, or to minimize threats to property. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. All DOE elements as specified in 3.a. are responsible for 
implementing the requirements of this Order.  See DOE M 435.1-1, Radioactive Waste 
Management Manual, for specific responsibilities. 
6. REFERENCES. DOE M 435.1-1, Radioactive Waste Management Manual, current 
version. 
7. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Office of 
Regulatory and Policy Affairs at (202) 586-0370.  
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
 
 THOMAS T. TAMURA 
 Acting Director of 
 Management and Administration

--- page 4 ---


--- page 5 ---
DOE O 435.1 Attachment 1 
7-9-99 Page 1 
 
 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
1. In the performance of this contract, the contractor is required to: 
A. Systematically plan, document, execute, and evaluate the management of DOE 
radioactive waste and assist the government in planning, executing and evaluating 
the management of DOE radioactive waste in accordance with the requirements 
of DOE O 435.1, Radioactive Waste Management. 
B. Assist the government in managing DOE radioactive waste so as to: 
(1) Protect the public from exposure to radiation from radioactive materials.  
(2) Protect the environment.  
(3) Protect workers including following requirements for radiation protection.  
C. Assist DOE in meeting its obligations and responsibilities under Executive Order 
12856, Federal Compliance with Right-to-Know Laws and Pollution Prevention 
Requirements, and Executive Order 13101, Greening the Government through 
Waste Prevention, Recycling, and Federal Acquisition, and The Pollution 
Prevention Act of 1990. 
D. Comply with the requirements in DOE M 435.1-1, Radioactive Waste 
Management Manual, unless such activities are specifically exempted by DOE O 
435.1, Section 3.d., as described below. 
(1) Activities conducted under the authority of the Director, Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Program, as described in Department of Energy National 
Security and Military Applications of Nuclear Energy Authorization Act of 
1985, Public Law 98-525. 
(2) Requirements that overlap or duplicate requirements of the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) related to radiation protection, nuclear 
safety (including quality assurance), and safeguards and security of 
nuclear material, do not apply to the design, construction, operation, and 
decommissioning of Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management 
facilities as defined in DOE O 250.1, Civilian Radioactive Waste 
Management Facilities Exemptions from Departmental Orders.   
(3) Requirements that duplicate or conflict with requirements of NRC or an 
Agreement State do not apply to facilities and activities licensed by the 
NRC or an Agreement State. 
(4) Requirements that duplicate or conflict with the Waste Isolation Pilot 
Plant Land Withdrawal Act of 1992, as amended, Public Law 102-579, do 
not apply to the operation of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant or the disposal 
of waste therein.

--- page 6 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 435.1 
Page 2 7-9-99 
 
 
(5) Unless managed in a low-level waste facility, requirements in 
DOE O 435.1 do not apply to byproduct material as defined in section 
11e.(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or naturally 
occurring radioactive material. 
(6) Spent nuclear fuel or non-waste materials. 
(7) Upon request or on its own initiative, DOE may grant exemptions from 
the requirements of DOE O 435.1 in accordance with the process provided 
by DOE M 251.1-1A, Directives System Manual. 
E. Incorporate these requirements into the contracts of all sub-contractors which 
are involved in the management of DOE radioactive waste.
