--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, H ealth, Safety, and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  VERIFICATION OF READINESS TO STARTUP OR RESTART HAZARD 
CATEGORY 1 AND 2 NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE.  This Order of the Department of Energy (DOE), including the National 
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), establishes the requirements for the DOE 
readiness reviews (RRs).  RRs are used to verify the readiness for startup and restart of 
Hazard Category (HC) 1 and 2 nuclear facilities, operations, or activities as described 
within this Order.  The final report documents the results of the RR and makes a 
conclusion as to whether startup or restart of the nuclear facility, activity, or operation 
can proceed safely. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 425.1E, Verification of Readiness to Startup or 
Restart Nuclear Facilities, dated September 30, 2024. 
Cancellation of an Order/directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any 
contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the Order/Directive.  Contractor 
Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in 
effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability.  This Order is applicable to DOE within the 
provisions and restrictions of the NNSA Act, found at Title XXXII of Public Law 
(P.L). 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000.  This 
Order applies to all nuclear facilities, operations or activities as defined in Title 10 
of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management, 
that are classified as HC 1 and 2 nuclear facilities. 
(1) Activities regulated by the Department of Transportation; and 
transportation of onsite transportation packages authorized by 49 CFR, 
Part 173, Shippers—General Requiremen ts for Shipments and Packagings, 
Subpart I.  Onsite transportation activities may be excluded with Program 
Secretarial Officer or Cognizant Secretarial Officer approval, and Central 
Technical Authority (CTA) concurrence, provided an alternate process 
is identified. 
DOE O 425.1F

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 425.1F 
 08-05-2026 
(2) The Administrator of the NNSA will assure that NNSA employees comply 
with their respective responsibilities under this Order.  Nothing in this 
Order will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s 
authority under Section 3212(d) of P.L. 106-65 to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
b. DOE Contractors.  The requirements of this Order shall be incorporated into 
applicable contracts, including Management and Operating contracts.  The 
contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD, if 
applicable.  Contractors shall comply with the requirements of applicable federal, 
state, and local laws and regulations in carrying out the requirements of this Order 
unless relief has been granted in writing.  Omission of any applicable law or 
regulation from the Order does not affect the obligation of the contractor to 
comply with such law or regulation.  Contractors must comply with the 
requirements of this Order, except to the extent modified by the equivalencies or 
exemptions identified herein or issued to the contractor in writing by DOE 
utilizing the process outlined in DOE Order (O) 251.1E, Departmental Directives 
Program, including as amended or updated. 
c. Equivalencies and Exemptions for DOE O 425.1F.  Equivalencies and exemptions 
to the requirements of this Order are processed in accordance with 
DOE O 251.1E.  CTA (or designee) concurrence is required for both exemptions 
and equivalencies to this Order for nuclear facilities. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at 50 United States Code §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for 
Naval Reactors, and 2511, and to ensure consistency throughout the joint 
Navy and DOE organization of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement 
and oversee all requirements and practices pertaining to this DOE Order 
for activities under the Director’s cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemptions.  This Order does not apply to the following: 
(a) Activities regulated through a license by the Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission (NRC) or a state under an agreement with NRC, 
including activities certified by NRC under Section 1701 of the 
Atomic Energy Act. 
(b) Activities in the Transportation Safeguards System in NNSA. 
(c) Other Equivalencies/Exemptions.  Any other equivalency or 
exemption to the Order requires the approval of the DOE’s Safety 
Basis Approval Authority (SBAA).  Requests for 
equivalencies/exemption will be adjudicated by DOE’s SBAA 
within 14 calendar days of receipt of a substantially 
complete request.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 425.1F 3 
08-05-2026 
d. Government-Owned, Government-Operated Facilities.  Attachment 1, CRD, of 
this Order sets forth requirements applicable to DOE government-owned, 
government-operated facilities.  Government operators must comply with the 
requirements in Attachment 1 of this Order. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. DOE Head of Field Element or Designee.  Ensure that properly scoped RRs are 
planned and conducted to verify readiness for the startup or restart of HC 1 and 
2 nuclear facilities, activities, or operations. 
b. HC 1 and 2 nuclear facilities, activities, or operations may be started (or restarted) 
only after RRs have been conducted and the approvals specified in this Order 
have been received. 
c. RR Process.  DOE Head of Field Element or designee will review the procedures 
that define the RR processes that will be utilized to implement this Order.  The 
RR process must, in all cases, demonstrate there is a reasonable assurance for 
adequate protection of workers, the public, and the environment from adverse 
consequences from the startup (or restart) of an HC 1 and 2 nuclear facility, 
activity, or operation.  The readiness process is illustrated within Attachment 2, 
Readiness Review Process Flow Chart. 
(1) Communication.  The prime contractor will communicate projected RR 
activities to the Startup Approval Authority (SAA) or designee. 
(2) Notification of Intent to Startup.  The prime contractor will provide formal 
correspondence to DOE, which should be at least 90 days prior to the start 
of the RR, but no earlier than SBAA approval of the Preliminary 
Documented Safety Analysis, if applicable.  The SBAA will review the 
notification, inform the SAA, and coordinate the RR team.  SAA 
determination is in accordance with Attachment 3, Startup Approval 
Authority and Readiness Review Determination Criteria. 
(a) The notification of intent to startup will include the submittal of 
the Readiness Review Plan (RP). 
(3) RP Content and Approval. 
(a) Content.  The prime contractor will develop an RP, using a graded 
approach to define the scope.  The RP may take into consideration 
the maturity of the prime contractor’s existing safety management 
programs that are in place to implement the Core Requirements 
(CRs).  The level of detail should also be commensurate with the 
complexity of the startup or restart.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 425.1F 
 08-05-2026 
It may be appropriate to perform RRs in a segmented approach to 
allow flexibility in managing specific activities (e.g., fuel receipt, 
storage, and loading before initial startup).  All listed 
documentation must be included unless it is not applicable to the 
specific scope of the activity.  Contents or the RP must include: 
1 A scope and purpose that addresses all Attachment 4, CRs.  
Exclusion of any CRs must be documented and justified 
within the RP. 
2 Prerequisites, as defined in Attachment 5, must be 
completed prior to the start of the RR or have 
compensatory measures that have been documented and 
approved.  This should include documentation ensuring 
system operability verification and testing (to the 
extent practical). 
3 A description of the physical and administrative boundaries 
of the RR. 
4 A description of the structure, systems, and components 
covered by the RR. 
5 A description of safety management and security programs 
to be reviewed. 
6 Proposed activities for the onsite review including 
demonstrations, interviews, and drills as applicable. 
(b) RP Approval.  For a contractor RR, the SAA will review and 
approve the RP with SBAA concurrence.  For a DOE RR, the RP 
must be reviewed and approved by the SBAA.  Both approvals are 
expected 30 days following the submittal. 
(4) DOE RR Team Composition.  DOE Head of Field Element or designee 
will select the RR team leader.  The team leader must then select the RR 
team members.  The RR team leader must not be assigned to assess 
facilities, activities, or operations for which they have direct 
responsibilities.  Team member should not be assigned to assess facilities, 
activities, or operations for which they have direct responsibilities to the 
maximum extent possible.  Team leader and members’ qualifications must 
be documented and shall address the following requirements: 
(a) Technical knowledge of the area assigned for evaluation, including 
experience working in the technical area. 
(b) Knowledge of the performance-based assessment process 
and methods.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 425.1F 5 
08-05-2026 
(c) Knowledge of the facility, activity, or operations-
specific information. 
(5) Prior to starting the DOE RR. 
(a) The prime contractor prerequisites will have been met or have 
compensatory measures that have been documented and approved. 
(b) Specific events significant to the startup and restart process that 
occur prior to the formal commencement of the RR (e.g., site 
emergency response drills) may be reviewed by the RR team at the 
time they are conducted. 
(6) Readiness to Proceed.  The SBAA must submit to the DOE RR Team 
Leader their authorization to commence the RR. 
(7) Commencement of RR. 
(a) Upon receipt of the authorization to commence the RR, the RR 
Team will initiate the RR, in accordance with the approved RP. 
(b) The RR will be executed in accordance with the approved RP. 
(c) The RR schedule will normally consist of: 
1 One week of document review. 
2 One week of onsite interviews and performance reviews as 
planned in the RP. 
3 One week to prepare the final report. 
4 Deviation from this schedule due to readiness segmentation 
may be justified and approved in the RP. 
(8) RR Final Report.  The final report must be prepared and approved by the 
team leader; concurred on by each team member. 
(a) The final report documents the results of the DOE RR and makes a 
conclusion as to whether startup or restart of the nuclear facility, 
activity, or operation can proceed safely.  The DOE RR final report 
must state whether the contractor has established the following: 
1 An agreed set of requirements to govern safe operations of 
the facility, activity, or operation has been formalized with 
DOE through the contract or other enforceable mechanism.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 425.1F 
 08-05-2026 
That these requirements have been appropriately 
implemented in the facility, activity, or operation or that 
appropriate compensatory measures, formally approved by 
DOE, are in place during the period prior to full 
implementation; and 
2 That, in the opinion of the RR team, adequate protection of 
the public health and safety, of worker safety, and the 
environment will be maintained. 
(b) If appropriate, the final report will include a Minority Opinion 
section that will give a means for team members to convey 
diverging opinions to the SBAA. 
(c) Any lessons learned during the RR must be documented in a 
lessons learned section of the final report. 
(9) Final Report Submittal.  The final report must be submitted to the SAA to 
be used as a basis for approving the startup or restart of the nuclear 
facility, activity, or operation.  A copy of the final RR report must be 
forwarded to the prime contractor and the Assistant Secretary of Energy 
for Nuclear Energy (NE-1).  A copy must be forwarded to the appropriate 
CTA and may be forwarded to DOE Office of Environment, Health, 
Safety and Security and Office of Enterprise Assessments for information. 
(10) Closure of Findings.  The closure of findings must be consistent with the 
issues management process. 
(11) Restart and Startup Approval.  DOE Head of Field Element or designee 
must ensure that the prime contractor has satisfactorily resolved all 
prestart findings identified during the RRs prior to startup or restart of the 
facility, activity, or operation.  The SAA, as identified in Attachment 3, 
approves startup or restart after compensatory measures (if needed) are in 
place and approved corrective action plans are in place to address any 
open post-start findings. 
(12) Approval to Proceed.  The SAA must provide an approval to proceed 
memorandum to the responsible prime contractor authorizing startup 
or restart. 
d. Records Management Program.  Requirements for maintenance and disposition of 
federal records, such as those pertaining to RRs, are provided under the general 
guidance of DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version.  The 
disposition, including destruction, of federal records must be in accordance with: 
(1) The General Records Schedules, as published by the National Archives 
and Records Administration (NARA), or

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 425.1F 7 
08-05-2026 
(2) DOE records disposition authority (Standard Form 115, Request for 
Records Disposition Authority), as approved by NARA. 
The cognizant Field Element Records Officer can provide guidance. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. DOE Headquarters Line Management. 
(1) Oversee DOE field methods for verifying readiness to startup and restart 
nuclear facilities, activities or operations. 
(2) Exercise delegation of authority and document all delegations of authority 
made under the provisions granted by this Order. 
b. DOE Head of Field Element or designee. 
(1) Ensure that the prime contractor properly implements the requirements of 
the CRD in this Order. 
(2) Establish procedures as necessary to manage the verification of readiness 
to startup or restart nuclear facilities, activities or operations in accordance 
with the requirements of this Order. 
c. Contracting Officer. 
(1) For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a site/facility 
management contract is affected by this Order, incorporate the 
requirements into the affected contract(s) via the “Laws, Regulations, and 
DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or through negotiation and 
modification, as appropriate. 
6. INVOKED TECHNICAL STANDARDS.  This Order does not invoke any DOE 
technical standards or industry standards as required methods.  Any technical standard or 
industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by this Order is not invoked by this 
Order.  Note:  DOE O 251.1, current version, provides a definition for “invoked 
technical standard.” 
7. REFERENCES. 
a. Title 10 CFR Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management. 
b. 10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection 
c. 49 CFR, Part 173, Subpart I, Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials 
d. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version. 
e. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version.

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 425.1F 
 08-05-2026 
f. DOE O 422.1, Conduct of Operations, current version. 
g. DOE O 433.1, Maintenance Management Program for DOE Nuclear Facilities, 
current version. 
h. DOE-STD-1027-2025, Chg Notice 1, Hazard Categorization of DOE 
Nuclear Facilities. 
i. DOE-STD-1073-2016, Configuration Management. 
j. DOE-STD-1189-2016, Integration of Safety into the Design Process. 
k. DOE-STD-3006-2010, Planning and Conducting Readiness Reviews. 
l. DOE-STD-3007-2007, Guidelines for Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at 
Department of Energy Non-Reactor Nuclear Facilities. 
8. DEFINITIONS.  See Attachment 5. 
9. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order should be referred to the Director, Office 
of Nuclear Safety Policy and Assistance, at (301) 903-3331. 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 425.1F Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 425.1F, VERIFICATION OF READINESS TO STARTUP OR RESTART 
HAZARD CATEGORY 1 AND 2 NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), 
contractors are responsible for complying with Attachments 3 and 4 of this Order, referenced in 
and made a part of this CRD, which provide program requirements and/or information applicable 
to contracts in which this CRD is inserted. 
1. Department of Energy (DOE), including the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA), Contractor Responsibilities.  This CRD applies to all nuclear facilities, 
activities, and operations classified as Hazard Categories (HC) 1 and 2 as defined in 
10 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 830.  Regardless of the performer of the 
work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the requirements of this CRD and 
flowing down CRD requirements to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to 
ensure contractor compliance. 
Contractor Requirements.  Contractor line management must develop procedures to 
define the processes that will be used to implement the responsibilities of this CRD.  The 
contractor must not develop RR processes similar to RRs that exempt facilities, activities, 
or operations from following the RR process described in this Order. 
a. RR Process.  The RR process must, in all cases, demonstrate there is a reasonable 
assurance for adequate protection of workers, the public, and the environment 
from adverse consequences from the start (or restart) of a HC 1 and 2 nuclear 
facility, activity, or operation.  The readiness process is described under 
Attachment 2, Readiness Review Process Flow Chart, and Attachment 5, 
Definitions.  For an RR, the contractor must prepare: an intent to startup 
notification, a Readiness Review Plan (RP) and a final report.  The contractor will 
perform the RR when the Startup Approval Authority (SAA) is the Senior 
Contractor Official.  Attachment 3, Startup Approval Authority (SAA), and 
Readiness Review (RR) Determination Criteria, describes how to determine the 
appropriate SAA. 
(1) Communication.  Contractors must communicate projected RR activities 
to the appropriate Safety Basis Approval Authority (SBAA) or designee. 
(2) Notification of Intent to Startup.  The prime contractor will provide formal 
correspondence to DOE, which should be 90 days prior to the start of the 
RR, but no earlier than SBAA approval of the Preliminary Documented 
Safety Analysis, if applicable.  The Senior Contractor Official will 
coordinate the RR. 
The notification of Intent to Startup will include the submittal of the RP to 
the SBAA.

--- page 10 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 425.1F 
Page 1-2 08-05-2026 
(3) RP Content and Approval. 
(a) Content.  The prime contractor will develop an RP, using a graded 
approach to define the scope.  The RP may take into consideration 
the maturity of the prime contractor existing safety management 
programs that are in place to implement the Core Requirements 
(CRs).  The level of detail should also be commensurate with the 
complexity of the startup or restart.  It may be appropriate to 
perform RRs in a segmented approach to allow flexibility in 
managing specific activities (e.g., fuel receipt, storage, loading 
before initial startup).  All listed documentation must be included 
unless it is not applicable to the specific scope of the activity.  
Contents of the RP must include: 
1 A scope and purpose that addresses all Attachment 4, Core 
Requirements (CRs).  Exclusion of any CRs must be 
documented and justified within the RP. 
2 Prerequisites, as defined in Attachment 5, that must be 
completed prior to the start of the RR or have 
compensatory measures that have been documented and 
approved.  This should include documentation ensuring 
system operability verification and testing (to the 
extent practicable). 
3 A description of the physical and administrative boundaries 
of the RR. 
4 A description of the structures, systems, and components 
covered by the RR. 
5 A description of safety management and security programs 
to be reviewed. 
6 Proposed activities for the onsite review, including 
demonstrations, interviews, and drills as applicable. 
(b) RP Approval.  For a contractor RR, the SAA will approve the RP 
with SBAA concurrence.  For a DOE RR, the RP must be 
reviewed and approved by the SBAA.  Both approvals are 
expected 30 days following the submittal. 
(4) Contractor RR Team Composition.  The contractor RR team leader must 
select the RR team members.  RR team leader and team members must not 
be assigned to assess facilities, activities or operations for which they have 
direct responsibilities.  Team leader and members’ qualifications must be 
documented and shall address the following requirements:

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 425.1F Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-3 
(a) Technical knowledge of the area assigned for evaluation, including 
experience working in the technical area. 
(b) Knowledge of the performance-based assessment process 
and methods. 
(c) Knowledge of the facility, activity, or 
operations-specific information. 
(5) Prior to starting the Contractor RR. 
(a) The prime contractor prerequisites have been met or have 
compensatory measures that have been documented and approved. 
(b) Specific events significant to the startup and restart process that 
occur prior to the formal commencement of the RR (e.g., site 
emergency response drills) may be reviewed by the RR team at the 
time they are conducted. 
(6) Readiness to Proceed.  The SAA must submit to the contractor RR team 
leader their authorization to commence the contractor RR. 
(7) Commencement of Contractor RR. 
(a) Upon receipt of the authorization to commence the contractor RR, 
the contractor RR Team will initiate the contractor RR, in 
accordance with the approved RP. 
(b) The RR will be executed in accordance with the approved RP. 
(8) Contractor RR Final Report.  The final report must be prepared and 
approved by the team leader and receive concurrence from each team 
member, and each team member must approve the section for which the 
team member is responsible. 
(a) The final report documents the results of the contractor RR and 
draws a conclusion as to whether startup or restart of the nuclear 
facility, activity, or operation can proceed safely.  The contractor 
RR final report must state whether the contractor has established 
the following: 
1 An agreed set of requirements to govern safe operations of 
the facility, activity, or operation has been formalized with 
DOE through the contract or other enforceable mechanism.

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 425.1F 
Page 1-4 08-05-2026 
2 That these requirements have been appropriately 
implemented in the facility, activity, or operation or 
appropriate compensatory measures, formally approved by 
DOE, are in place during the period prior to full 
implementation; and 
3 That, in the opinion of the contractor RR team, adequate 
protection of the public health and safety of worker safety, 
and the environment will be maintained. 
(b) If appropriate, the final report will include a Minority Opinion 
section that will give a means for team members to convey 
diverging opinions to the SAA. 
(c) Any lessons learned during the contractor RR must be documented 
in a lessons learned section of the final report. 
(9) Final Report Submittal.  The final report must be submitted to the SAA. 
(10) Closure of Findings.  Contractor line management closure of contractor 
RR findings must be consistent with the Issues Management Process in 
DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, 
current version. 
(11) Restart and Startup Approval.  Senior Contracting Official must ensure all 
pre-start findings identified during the RR are satisfactorily resolved prior 
to startup or restart of the facility, activity, or operation.  The SAA may 
approve startup or restart only after pre-start finding are resolved, 
compensatory measures (if needed) are in place; and approved corrective 
action plans are in place to address any open post-start findings. 
b. Records Management Program.  Requirements for maintenance and disposition of 
federal records, such as those pertaining to RRs, are provided under the general 
guidance of DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version.  The 
disposition, including destruction, of federal records must be in accordance with: 
(1) The General Records Schedules, as published by the National Archives 
and Records Administration (NARA), or 
(2) DOE records disposition authority (Standard Form 115, Request for 
Records Disposition Authority), as approved by NARA. 
The cognizant Field Element Office Records Officer will provide guidance 
as needed.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 2 – Readiness Review Flowchart 
XX-XX-2026 Page 2-1 
ATTACHMENT 2 
READINESS REVIEW FLOWCHART 
This Attachment provides information associated with this Order as well as information 
applicable to contracts in which the associated Attachment 1, Contractor Requirements 
Document, is inserted.  The flow chart describes the Readiness Review (RR) process.  Either a 
contractor RR or a DOE RR will be performed in accordance with the determination criteria of 
Attachment 3, Startup Notification Report, Startup Authorization Authority (SAA), and 
Readiness Review (RR) Determination Criteria.

--- page 14 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 3 – Fe deral and Contractor Employees 
08-05-2026 Page 3-1 
ATTACHMENT 3 
STARTUP APPROVAL AUTHORITY (SAA), AND READINESS REVIEW (RR) 
DETERMINATION CRITERIA 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with this Order as well as 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated Attachment 1, 
Contractor Requirements Document, is inserted. 
1. For nuclear facility, activity, or operation startups or restarts, the Approval Authority 
must be determined using the criteria in Attachment 3, Table 1, SAA and RR 
Determination Criteria.  Determining the level of authority, the SAA, must be 
commensurate with RR criteria. 
2. DOE Head of Field Element or designee must ensure that a properly scoped RR is 
planned and conducted to verify readiness for the restart of Hazard Category (HC) 1 and 
2 nuclear facilities, activities, or operations, unless both of the following conditions 
are met: 
a. The restart is a resumption of routine operations after a short interruption (such as 
maintenance activities governed by existing maintenance procedures and 
processes) as defined in local procedures; and 
b. The restart is conducted using contractor approved operating procedures that 
provide specific direction for operating systems and equipment during normal 
conditions. 
3. Justification for the SAA and RR determination must be documented in writing to the 
SBAA 90 days prior to the RR, beginning with a copy sent to the Program Secretarial 
Officer (PSO) and Central Technical Authority.  If an RR is not to be performed, the 
contractor’s standard operating procedures for startup or restart will be used. 
4. If any of the following conditions occur, a RR must be conducted in accordance with this 
Order.  Additional criteria are included in Attachment 3, Table 1: 
a. Initial reactor startup. 
b. Initial startup of a newly constructed HC 1 or 2 non-reactor nuclear facility.  For 
the purpose of this criterion, a newly constructed HC 1 or 2 non-reactor nuclear 
facility refers to a new facility (not operation or activity) with a new safety-basis 
documentation—that is, a safety evalua tion report (SER), documented safety 
analysis (DSA), and technical safety requirements (TSRs). 
c. Initial startup after conversion of an existing facility to a new nuclear mission 
with a new safety-basis documentation (new SER, DSA and TSRs). 
d. Restart of nuclear facility, activity, or operation that has upgraded its hazard 
categorization to HC 1 or 2.

--- page 15 ---
Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 425.1F  
Page 3-2 08-05-2026 
e. Restart after a DOE management official directs the shutdown of a nuclear 
facility, activity, or operation for safety reasons. 
f. Restart after an extended shutdown for an HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, activity, or 
operation.  Extended shutdown for an HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, activity, or 
operation is defined as 24 months. 
g. Restart of an HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, activity, or operation after major 
modification (determination of “major modifications” is made per DOE-STD-
1189). 
h. Initial startup of a new HC 1 or 2 activity or operation after major modification 
(determination of “major modifications” is made per DOE-STD-1189 within an 
HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility). 
i. Startup or restart of facility, activity, or operation as directed by DOE line 
management. 
j. The SAA level will determine the type of RR, either a DOE RR or contractor RR. 
Table 1: SAA and RR Determination Criteria 
Activity 
Startup Approval Authority 
Hazard Category 1 and 2 
Off Site 
Initial reactor startup Secretary of Energy o r designee 
Any other activity listed below PSO o r designee 
On Site 
Initial Reactor Startup Secretary of Energy o r designee 
Initial startup of a newly constructed HC 1 or 2 
non-reactor nuclear facility.  For the purpose of 
this criterion, a newly constructed HC 1 or 2 
non-reactor nuclear facility refers to a new 
facility (not operation or activity) with a new 
safety-basis documentation (new SER, DSA, 
and TSRs). 
DOE SBAA or designee 
Initial startup after conversion of an existing 
facility to a new nuclear mission with a new 
safety-basis documentation (new SER, DSA 
and TSRs).1 
DOE SBAA or designee 
Restart of nuclear facility, activity, or 
operation that has upgraded its hazard 
categorization to HC 1 or 2. 
DOE SBAA or designee 
Restart after a DOE management official 
directs the shutdown of a nuclear facility, 
activity, or operation for safety reasons. 
DOE SBAA or designee

--- page 16 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 3 – Fe deral and Contractor Employees 
08-05-2026 Page 3-3 
Activity 
Startup Approval Authority 
Hazard Category 1 and 2 
Restart after extended shutdown for an 
HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, activity, or 
operation.2 
>24 months 
Senior Contractor Official 
Restart of an HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, 
activity, or operation after major 
modification.3 
Senior Contractor Official 
Initial startup of a new HC 1 or 2 activity or 
operation after major modification within a 
HC 1 or 2 facility.3 
Senior Contractor Official 
Startup or restart of a facility, activity, or 
operation as directed by DOE line 
management. 
DOE SBAA or designee 
For all other cases: Senior Contractor Official 
Note 1:  New includes new construction. 
Note 2: Extended shutdown for an HC 1 or 2 nuclear facility, activity, and operation is defined as 24 months. 
Note 3:  Determination of “major modifications” is made per DOE-STD-1189.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 4 – Fe deral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 4-1 
ATTACHMENT 4 
CORE REQUIREMENTS (CRS) 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which 
Attachment 1, Contractor Responsibilities Document, is inserted.  This Attachment defines the 
CRs used in this Order. 
1. CRs verify the readiness of personnel, procedures, programs, and equipment within the 
scope of the RR to safely startup or restart a nuclear facility, activity, or operation.  The 
CRs are aligned according to specific functional areas (FAs) or safety management 
programs (SMPs) that are developed and implemented across Department of Energy 
(DOE) sites to ensure activities are performed in a manner that adequately protects 
workers, the public, and the environment.  Cross-cutting requirements are applicable to 
each of these programs and need to be evaluated to ensure their success. 
a. Each CR listed as applicable must be evaluated against the following cross-
cutting requirements (cross-cutting requirements may be excluded and 
documented in the RP with appropriate justifications): 
(1) FA or SMP documents have been approved by DOE, if required by DOE 
Order, Codes of Federal Regulations (CFRs), or direction. 
(2) FA or SMP implementing procedures have been effectively implemented 
in support of the facility and clearly define roles, responsibilities, and 
reporting relationships. 
(3) A sufficient number of qualified personnel are available to effectively 
implement the FA or SMP in support of the facility. 
(4) Adequate facilities and equipment are available to ensure that the FA or 
SMP can be performed adequately for safe facility operation. 
(5) Line management and personnel level of knowledge is adequate based on 
examination results, direct observation during performance 
demonstrations, and interviews. 
(6) Line management and personnel exhibit an awareness of public and 
worker safety and health and environmental protection requirements and, 
through their actions, demonstrate a high-priority commitment to comply 
with these requirements. 
(7) Periodic assessments (independent and/or self) of FA or SMPs are 
performed to verify continued robust performance.  Issues (e.g., findings, 
deficiencies, observations, or recommendations) from assessments, both 
internal and external, are effectively resolved.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 425.1F  
Page 4-2 08-05-2026 
b. The CRs are as follows: 
(1) Conduct of Operations, Procedures, and Work Control.  A conduct of 
operations program meets the requirements of DOE O 422.1, Conduct of 
Operations.  The formality and discipline of operations are adequate to 
conduct work safely, and programs are in place to maintain this formality 
and discipline for site/facility processes in accordance with the approved 
Conduct of Operations Implementation Matrix. 
Procedures are approved and in place for operating the facility and 
systems.  The procedures reflect all modifications that have been made to 
the facility systems.  Only the most current revision of each procedure is 
in use. 
(2) Contractor Assurance.  An effective Contractor Assurance System (CAS) 
meets the requirements is necessary.  A CAS has been established to 
identify, evaluate, and resolve deficiencies and recommendations made by 
contractor line management and independent contractor audit and 
assessment groups.  The process also provides for resolution of issues and 
recommendations by external official review teams and audit 
organizations. 
(3) Criticality Safety.  A Criticality Safety Program (CSP) that meets the 
requirements of DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, including DOE approval of 
the CSP document, have been developed, implemented, and maintained. 
Criticality safety evaluations conducted in accordance with DOE-STD-
3007-2017, Guidelines for Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at 
Department of Energy Non-Reactor Nuclear Facilities, or by other 
documented methods approved by DOE, must show that entire processes 
involving fissionable materials will remain subcritical under normal and 
credible abnormal conditions, including those initiated by design-basis 
events.  Implementation of the Criticality Safety Evaluation credited 
controls is reviewed annually for all operations. 
Facilities that conduct operations using fissionable material in a form that 
could inadvertently accumulate in significant quantities must include 
procedures for detecting and characterizing accumulations. 
(4) Emergency Planning and Preparedness, and Operational Drills.  A routine 
operations drill program and an emergency management drill and exercise 
program have been established and implemented.  Records for each 
program are adequate to demonstrate the effectiveness of completed drills 
and exercises as well as planning for future drills and exercises.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 4 – Fe deral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 4-3 
(5) Conduct of Engineering.  Structures, systems, and components (SSCs) 
required for safe and compliant operations have been identified, and 
programs are in place to ensure adequate maintenance, operations, and 
modifications.  These programs include requirements for demonstrating 
compliance with the design requirements, verifying operability of SSCs, 
availability of replacement and spare parts, and configuration management 
of documents and equipment. 
(a) The facility has implemented a maintenance program compliant 
with DOE O 433.1, Maintenance Management Program, for DOE 
nuclear facilities.  A program is in place to confirm and 
periodically assess the condition and operability of SSCs.  This 
includes examinations of records of tests and calibration of these 
systems.  A documented evaluation of maintenance items open 
before the declaration of readiness (if any) has been conducted to 
determine if the failure to complete the maintenance item could 
adversely influence operations. 
(b) Provisions have been established for storage, issuance, and 
availability of an adequate and readily available supply of tools 
and critical spare parts. 
(c) Credited safety equipment being started up or restarted meets the 
requirements of DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, for the safety 
functions and process controls credited in the safety 
documentation, the design has been analyzed to demonstrate 
compliance with the design inputs, and design outputs provide 
specific limits, controls, and technical directions for SSCs to the 
constructor, operator, or modifier. 
(d) A configuration management program in accordance with DOE-
STD-1073, Configuration Management, is defined and 
implemented to control facility modifications with emphasis on 
SSCs.  Authorized modifications within the scope of the RR have 
been completed and fully closed or evaluated and determined not 
to affect the ability to safely start up or restart nuclear operations. 
(6) Fire Protection.  A documented fire protection program in accordance with 
DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, that includes the elements and requirements 
identified in the Order for design, operations, emergency response, fire 
analysis and assessments, wildland fire, and specific Fire Protection 
Program criteria has been developed, implemented, and maintained by the 
contractor.

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 425.1F  
Page 4-4 08-05-2026 
(7) Nuclear Safety.  Facility/process safety-basis (SB) documentation 
(documented safety analysis [DSA], hazard analysis report [HAR], and 
technical safety requirements [TSRs]) characterizes the hazards/risks 
associated with the facility/process; identifies preventive and mitigating 
measures to adequately protect workers, the public, and the environment 
from those hazards/risks; describes the safety envelope of the 
facility/process; is approved; and controls are implemented as required by 
10 CFR Part 830, Nuclear Safety Management, Subpart B. 
A DOE approved Unreviewed Safety Question procedure has been 
effectively implemented. 
Offsite and onsite shipments of hazardous and/or radioactive materials 
meet applicable requirements as cited in SB documents. 
(8) Personnel and Management Training and Qualifications.  The selection, 
training, and qualification programs for personnel performing work at or 
managing the facility, activity, or operation that is starting or restarting 
have been established, documented, and effectively implemented, and they 
meet the requirements of DOE O 426.2, Personnel Selection, Training, 
Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities.  
Training and qualification requirements for each position encompass the 
range of assigned duties and activities. 
Modifications to the facility, process, or system have been reviewed for 
potential impacts on training and qualifications.  Training has been 
performed to incorporate all aspects of these changes. 
(9) Quality Assurance.  A contractor Quality Assurance Program (QAP) 
meeting the requirements of 10 CFR Part 830 is in place and has been 
approved by DOE.  The Quality Assurance (QA) criteria described in the 
QAP have been implemented via the contractor’s QA Program and 
integrated with other SMPs.  If applicable, the contractor has submitted to 
DOE their basis of the graded approach used to implement nuclear 
safety requirements. 
(10) Radiation Protection.  A Radiation Protection Program compliant with 
10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection, regulations has been 
documented, approved by DOE, and implemented.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 4 – Fe deral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 4-5 
(11) Startup/Restart Startup Plan.  An adequate startup plan (if applicable) has 
been developed that includes plans for graded operations and testing after 
startup or resumption to simultaneously confirm operability of equipment, 
the viability of procedures, description of compensatory measures required 
during the approach to full operations, and the performance and 
knowledge of the operators.  The plans should indicate validation 
processes for equipment, procedures, and operators after startup or 
resumption of operations, including any required restrictions and 
additional oversight. 
(12) Safety and Health.  Other SMPs identified in the SB or FAs deemed 
important to the safety and protection of workers, the public, and the 
environment are documented, implemented, and maintained.  This may 
include, but is not limited to, areas such as environmental protection; 
safeguards and security; waste management; and transportation 
and packaging. 
(13) Federal Qualifications (DOE Only).  The personnel at the DOE Field 
Element assigned responsibilities for providing direction and guidance to 
the contractor and those individuals assigned oversight responsibilities 
(including facility representatives) within the scope of the RR, possess 
appropriate qualification, knowledge and competence to perform 
those functions. 
(14) DOE Management System (DOE Only).  DOE Field Element management 
systems for oversight of facility operations, such as oversight and 
assessment programs, facility representatives, technical qualification 
program, corrective action management system, and quality assurance 
programs, are adequate.

--- page 22 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 5 – Fe deral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 5-1 
ATTACHMENT 5 
DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information applicable to contracts in which the Attachment 1, 
Contractor Requirements Document, is inserted.  This Attachment defines the terms used in and 
pertinent to this Order.  Additional definitions can be found in DOE-STD-3006-2010, Planning 
and Conducting Readiness Reviews. 
1. Core Requirement (CR).  A fundamental area or topic evaluated during a Readiness 
Review (RR).  CRs verify the readiness of personnel, procedures, programs, and 
equipment within the scope of the RR to safely start or restart a nuclear facility, activity 
or operations.  The CRs are aligned according to specific functional areas/safety 
management programs.  See Attachment 4 for a detailed description of CRs. 
2. Line Management.  Refers the unbroken chain of responsibility that extends from the 
Secretary of Energy to the Deputy Secretary, to the Secretarial Officers who set program 
policy and plans and develop assigned programs, to the program and Field Element 
Managers, and to the contractors and subcontractors who are responsible for execution of 
these programs. 
3. Finding.  Nonconformance with a stated requirement that represents either: (1) a 
systematic failure to establish or implement an adequate program or control or (2) a 
failure that could result in unacceptable impact on the safety of personnel, the facility, the 
general public, or the environment during nuclear operations.  Findings are categorized as 
either pre-start or post-start (DOE-STD-3006-2010, Planning and Conducting Readiness 
Reviews, includes pre- and post-start finding screening criteria): 
a. Pre-start finding.  A finding that reflects a programmatic or implementation 
deficiency that requires corrective action to ensure operations are conducted 
safely when started. 
b. Post-start finding.  A finding that requires corrective action to mitigate longer-
term concerns or programmatic deterioration. 
4. New Nuclear Facility.  This is a reactor or a nonreactor nuclear facility where an activity 
is initiated for or on behalf of DOE that includes any related area, structure, facility, or 
process to the extent necessary to ensure proper implementation of the requirements 
established in 10 CFR 830, Nuclear Safety Management.  The term refers to an entire 
new facility (or conversion of an existing non-nuclear facility to a nuclear mission) 
devoted to the operation and maintenance of a new program activity, which is generally 
covered by a unique Documented Safety Analysis. 
5. Nuclear Operations.  As used in this Order, nuclear operations means nuclear facilities, 
operations, and/or activities that fall within the scope of this Order.

--- page 23 ---
Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 425.1F 
Page 5-2 08-05-2026 
6. Prerequisites.  A set of specific, measurable actions or conditions, that the RP has 
included as part of the scope of the RR.  The prerequisites, when completed, provide 
assurance that readiness has been achieved.  The prerequisites should include verification 
of engineering reviews, safety-basis implementation, procedures, training, system 
operability, and integrated testing.  The prerequisites are to be completed prior to the start 
of the respective RR or have compensatory measures that have been documented 
and approved. 
7. Program work.  Work in a reactor or non-reactor nuclear facility that is accomplished to 
further the goals of the facility mission or the program for which the facility is operated.  
Program work may include deactivation and decommissioning or environmental 
restoration activities when that is the mission of the facility.  Program work is not 
accomplished when an operational facility is shut down.  Program work does not include 
work that would be required to maintain the facility in a safe shutdown condition, 
minimize radioactive material storage, or accomplish modifications and correct 
deficiencies required before program work can resume. 
8. Restart.  The resumption of program work.  Restarts requiring an RR can occur in 
operating facilities if the activity or operation to be resumed meets RR requirements.  A 
restart may be required even if the same program work is ongoing in another portion of 
the operating facility. 
9. Scope.  The overall magnitude of the RR.  This is defined by the physical breadth and 
depth of the facilities, activity, or operation to be started/restarted, the breadth of CRs 
selected, and the depth of evaluation of these CRs during the RR. 
10. Shutdown.  (1) A situation in which a reactor is taken subcritical, either manually or 
automatically, to a safe shutdown condition; (2) a condition in which a non-reactor 
nuclear facility, activity or operation ceases; or (3) a condition in which a programmatic 
nuclear operation or activity ceases, but the structure containing the process may 
remain operational (i.e., not shut down).  In a shutdown condition, a facility must still 
meet all applicable technical safety requirements and environmental, safety, and 
health requirements. 
A shutdown condition does not exist if all the following apply: 
a. Safety Class and Safety Significant SSCs are operable and have been maintained 
via an effective maintenance and surveillance program; 
b. Operator and support staff knowledge, skills, and qualifications are maintained 
through an approved training and proficiency program; 
c. Operating, alarm response, and abnormal/emergency procedures are current; 
d. Configuration management and safety basis controls (including TSRs) are fully 
implemented; and

--- page 24 ---
DOE O 425.1F  Attachment 5 – Fe deral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 5-3 
e. Existing performance gaps affecting operational readiness are identified and 
mitigated through compensatory actions and tracked in an approved corrective 
action management process. 
11. Startup Approval Authority (SAA).  The line manager is designated in accordance with 
Attachment 3 of this Order to authorize the start of nuclear operations when all 
requirements of the Order have been met.  The SAA may range from a Senior Contractor 
Official to the Secretary of Energy.
