--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
Washington, D.C. 
Approved: 1-31-2019 
SUBJECT: DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY EMPLOYEE CONCERNS PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE.  The purpose of this Order is to establish the criteria and processes to maintain
a consistent Employee Concerns Program (ECP) across the Department of Energy
(DOE), including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), that:
a. Encourages the free and open expression of Employee Concerns, as defined in
this Order;1
b. Provides DOE/NNSA federal, contractor, and subcontractor employees with an
independent and formal avenue to raise Employee Concerns; and
c. Supports a Safety Culture where Employee Concerns can be promptly identified
and resolved without fear of Retaliation/Reprisal.
This Order provides direction to federal employees with respect to implementation of the 
ECP administered by federal ECP Managers (DOE ECP Managers) at DOE headquarters 
and at DOE/NNSA Field Offices (DOE ECP).  DOE ECPs are available to receive 
Employee Concerns brought by DOE federal, contractor, and subcontractor employees. 
The Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) (Attachment 1) sets forth the 
requirements applicable to any contractor that has the CRD incorporated into its contract. 
Appendix A sets forth further requirements for the DOE ECPs, but does not impose 
requirements on contractor-established ECPs (Contractor ECPs). 
This Order does not discharge the obligation of employees to meet the filing 
requirements or established timeframes, or constitute notice to DOE/NNSA, for other 
established processes. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES. DOE O 442.1A, Department of Energy Employee Concerns
Program, dated 6-6-01 and DOE Guide 442.1-1, Department of Energy Employee
Concerns Program Guide, dated 2-01-99.
Cancellation of a DOE directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any
contractual obligation to comply with the Order. CRDs that have been incorporated into a
contract remain in effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract
commitment or regulatory obligation is modified to eliminate requirements that are no
longer applicable or substitute a new set of requirements.
1 Capitalized terms used but not defined in the text of this Order are defined in paragraph 7 of this Order. 
DOE O 442.1B

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 442.1B 
1-31-2019
3. DEPARTMENTAL APPLICABILITY.
a. Departmental Elements.
(1) Except for the equivalency in paragraph 3.c., this Order applies to
all DOE/NNSA elements, including those elements created after
the Order is issued.
(2) The Administrator of the NNSA must ensure that NNSA employees
comply with their responsibilities under this directive. Nothing in this
directive will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s
authority under Section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary.
b. DOE Contractors.  Except for the equivalency in paragraph 3.c., the CRD
(Attachment 1) establishes the requirements of this Order that will apply to
contracts that include the CRD. The CRD (Attachment 1) must be included in all
contracts and subcontracts that contain Department of Energy Acquisition
Regulation (DEAR) clause 970.5204-2, Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives.
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions. In accordance with the responsibilities and
authorities assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion
Program, codified at 50 U.S. Code (U.S.C.) Sections 2406 and 2511, and to
ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion
Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors will implement and
oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Order for activities under
his/her cognizance, as deemed appropriate.
4. REQUIREMENTS.
a. Establishment of the DOE ECP.
(1) The ECP Director must establish a DOE ECP in accordance with this
Order.
(2) Field Offices must establish a DOE ECP in accordance with this Order.
Field Offices may share a DOE ECP, provided that it is in reasonable
geographic proximity, and reasonably accessible, to their federal and
contractor employees.
(3) Heads of Departmental Elements may choose to establish their own DOE
ECPs for their headquarters federal and contractor employees per
paragraph 5.e.(1)(b), in accordance with this Order.
(4) DOE ECP Managers must have direct access to the Field Office Manager
or Head of Departmental Element (or their designees), as applicable, with
respect to matters relating to the DOE ECP.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 442.1B 3 
1-31-2019
(5) The ECP Director and DOE ECP Managers must be federal employees.
b. Communications to Employees. DOE federal and contractor employees must be
informed of the following on at least an annual basis:
(1) The availability of the ECP as an avenue for filing an Employee Concern;
(2) Information as to where an employee may submit an Employee Concern,
and that the employee may do so confidentially or anonymously; and
(3) That employees are encouraged to seek resolution through local complaint
or dispute resolution systems, or with first line supervisors, but that
alternatively, they have the right to report Employee Concerns through the
ECP.
c. DOE ECP Implementation. DOE ECPs must be implemented in accordance with
approved implementing documentation (as described in Appendix A) and this
Order.
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.
a. Deputy Secretary.
(1) Fosters a strong Safety Culture where Employee Concerns can be promptly 
identified and resolved without fear of
Retaliation/Reprisal.
(2) Provides an annual notice to federal and contractor employees
regarding the ECP, which includes:
(a) A statement regarding the availability of the ECP as an avenue for 
filing an Employee Concern;
(b) Federal ECP contact information, and a statement that an employee 
may submit an Employee Concern confidentially or anonymously; 
and
(c) A statement encouraging employees to seek resolution through 
local complaint or dispute resolution systems, or with first line 
supervisors, but that alternatively, they have the right to report 
Employee Concerns through the ECP.
b. Under Secretary (of  Energy).
(1) Establishes and maintains the ECP Director’s position within the
Office of the Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health,
Safety and Security.

--- page 4 ---
4   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
(2) Supports implementation of the ECP Director’s responsibilities as 
described in paragraph 5.d. 
c. Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security (or 
designee). 
(1) Maintains, manages and provides resources for the implementation 
of the ECP Director’s responsibilities as described in paragraph 
5.d. 
(2) Reviews and, if acceptable, approves the implementing 
documentation for the ECP Director’s ECP. 
d. ECP Director.2 
(1) Develops, promulgates, and implements ECP requirements. 
(2) Provides guidance and assistance to DOE organizations in 
effectively implementing ECP directives and policies. 
(3) Provides support to the Deputy Secretary in preparing the annual 
notice to federal and contractor employees regarding the ECP, 
which is described in paragraph 5.a.(2). 
(4) Information; Site Visits; Training. 
(a) Develops and maintains the DOE agency-wide system for tracking 
and trending Employee Concerns. 
(b) Provides to the Deputy Secretary; the Under Secretary of Energy; 
the Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and 
Security; Heads of Departmental Elements; Field Office Managers; 
the Office of Enterprise Assessments; and DOE federal and 
contractor employees information on program trends, lessons 
learned, and the effectiveness of DOE and Contractor ECP 
implementation. 
(c) Serves as a resource for other ECPs, and conducts site assistance 
visits to DOE and contractor organizations to help DOE ECP 
Managers and Contractor ECP Managers share best practices and 
implement ECPs in accordance with this Order or the CRD, as 
applicable. 
                                                 
2 The ECP Director also receives and processes certain complaints filed pursuant to 10 Code of Federal Regulations 
(C.F.R.) part 708, DOE Contractor Employee Protection Program. Information regarding the types of complaints 
accepted under 10 C.F.R. part 708 and the procedure for processing those complaints is set forth in that regulation.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 442.1B  5 
1-31-2019 
 
 
(d) Establishes training curricula for DOE ECP Managers and DOE 
ECP staff, as well as for subject matter experts who support the 
ECP. 
(1) Coordinates Departmental correspondence prepared in response to 
external inquiries (e.g., Congressional, Government Accountability 
Office) regarding the DOE ECP. 
(2) Serves as DOE ECP Manager for those DOE headquarters 
contractor and federal employees not covered by another 
headquarters DOE ECP. 
(a) Develops ECP implementing documentation (as specified in 
Appendix A) for the ECP Director’s ECP. Submits the 
implementing documentation to the Associate Under Secretary for 
Environment, Health, Safety and Security or his designee for 
approval. 
(b) Decides, based on the approved implementing documentation and 
the procedures described in Appendix A, how to process concerns 
for which the ECP Director serves as the DOE ECP Manager. 
(c) When an Employee Concern must be transferred from another 
DOE ECP (for example, due to a Conflict-of-Interest), the ECP 
Director may counsel the transferring office as to a more 
appropriate venue for the concern, or accept the transfer, and serve 
as the DOE ECP Manager for the concern, as the ECP Director 
determines is appropriate. 
e. Heads of Departmental Elements. 
(1) General. 
(a) Support DOE federal and contractor employees’ rights to raise 
Employee Concerns to the DOE ECP Manager or ECP Director 
without fear of Retaliation/Reprisal. 
(b) For the Departmental Element’s federal employees at headquarters, 
and employees of contractors at headquarters for whom the 
Departmental Element has oversight authority: 
1 Establish and designate a DOE ECP Manager, or 
2 Direct such employees with Employee Concerns to the 
ECP Director.

--- page 6 ---
6   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
(c) Establish, where appropriate, an ECP point-of-contact to facilitate 
communications between the ECP Director and DOE ECP 
Managers for which the Departmental Element has responsibility. 
(d) Provide resources for headquarters DOE ECP Managers within 
their organizations, including appropriate training for DOE ECP 
Managers and other ECP personnel in ECP policies, procedures, 
processes, and practices. 
(e) Approve and implement Corrective Actions, as appropriate, in 
response to the issues identified as part of the closure of a federal 
employee’s Employee Concern that has been Substantiated or 
Partially Substantiated by the DOE ECP Manager or ECP Director. 
(2) With respect to DOE ECP Managers and DOE ECPs at headquarters for 
whom the Departmental Element has responsibility: 
(a) Review and, if acceptable, approve, the implementing 
documentation for the DOE ECP. 
(b) Use Assessment results to evaluate the effectiveness of the DOE 
ECP and the processes used to implement this Order. Implement 
improvement actions, when appropriate, to address issues 
impacting the effectiveness of the DOE ECP. 
(3) With respect to contractors at headquarters for whom the Head of 
Departmental Element has oversight responsibility: 
(a) Identify contracts to which the CRD applies and notify Contracting 
Officers when contracts are affected by this Order. 
(b) Approve, as appropriate, any Corrective Actions to be transmitted 
to the contractor by the Contracting Officer with respect to a 
contractor employee’s Employee Concern that has been 
Substantiated or Partially Substantiated by the DOE ECP Manager. 
(c) Ensure any direction to contractors is issued through the 
appropriate Contracting Officer. 
(d) Provide oversight of Contractor ECPs through the appropriate 
Contracting Officer. 
f. Field Office Managers. 
(1) General; Notifications.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 442.1B  7 
1-31-2019 
 
 
(a) Support DOE federal and contractor employees’ right to raise 
Employee Concerns to the DOE ECP Manager without fear of 
Retaliation/Reprisal. 
(b) Issue, with the support of the Field Office DOE ECP Manager, at 
least an annual basis, a notice that provides: 
1 A statement regarding the availability of the ECP as an 
avenue for filing an Employee Concern; 
2 Local ECP contact information and a statement that an 
employee may submit an Employee Concern confidentially 
or anonymously; and 
3 A statement encouraging employees to seek resolution 
through local complaint or dispute resolution systems, or 
with first line supervisors, but that alternatively, they have 
the right to report Employee Concerns through the ECP. 
(2) Administration of Field Office DOE ECPs. 
(a) Designate the Field Office DOE ECP Manager, and, as needed, 
other management position(s) responsible for developing and 
implementing the Field Office DOE ECP. 
(b) Review and, if acceptable, approve, the implementing 
documentation for the Field Office DOE ECP. 
(c) Consistent with direction from the cognizant Head of the 
Departmental Element, provide adequate support and resources to 
DOE ECP Managers for effective implementation of the Field 
Office DOE ECP, including appropriate training for DOE ECP 
Managers and other ECP personnel in ECP policies, procedures, 
processes, and practices. 
(d) Use Assessment results to evaluate the effectiveness of the Field 
Office DOE ECP and the processes used to implement this Order. 
Implement improvement actions, when appropriate, to address 
issues impacting the effectiveness of the Field Office DOE ECP. 
(e) Approve and implement, as appropriate, Corrective Actions 
responsive to the issues identified as part of the closure of a federal 
employee’s Employee Concern that has been Substantiated or 
Partially Substantiated by the DOE ECP Manager. 
(3) Administration of Field Office Contractor ECPs:

--- page 8 ---
8   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
(a) Identify contracts to which the CRD applies and notify Contracting 
Officers when contracts are affected by this Order. 
(b) Approve, as appropriate, any Corrective Actions to be transmitted 
to the contractor by the Contracting Officer with respect to a 
contractor employee’s Employee Concern that has been 
Substantiated or Partially Substantiated by the DOE ECP Manager. 
(c) Ensure any direction to contractors is issued through the 
appropriate Contracting Officer. 
(d) Provide oversight of Contractor ECPs through the appropriate 
Contracting Officer. 
g. DOE Headquarters and Field Office ECP Managers. DOE ECP Managers must: 
(1) Develop ECP implementing documentation as specified in Appendix A, 
and submit the implementing documentation to the appropriate Head of 
Departmental Element or Field Office Manager for approval. 
(2) Implement the ECP, and disposition Employee Concerns, in accordance 
with this Order and the approved implementing documentation. 
(3) Review the Contractor’s proposed ECP implementing documentation and 
provide a recommendation to the Contracting Officer as to whether to 
approve the proposed ECP.  
h. Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA). 
(1) Provides technical assistance, as requested, to DOE organizations in 
investigations of health, safety, and security concerns. 
(2) Independently assesses the overall effectiveness of DOE and Contractor 
ECPs and the processes used to implement this Order, as appropriate. 
(3) When an Employee Concern is raised to EA management or staff, advises 
the employee on alternate avenues for raising Employee Concerns, 
including the DOE ECP or Contractor ECP, as appropriate. 
(4) Interfaces with the ECP Director and DOE ECP Managers regarding DOE 
ECP implementation, as well as programmatic implementation impacts. 
(5) Tracks complaints of Retaliation/Reprisal relating to Employee Concerns 
to determine if enforcement actions pursuant to 10 C.F.R. part 820 or 10 
C.F.R. part 851 are warranted. 
i. Contracting Officers.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 442.1B  9 
1-31-2019 
 
 
(1) Incorporate the CRD to this Order (Attachment 1) into all contracts for the 
management and operation of DOE-owned or DOE-leased facilities (i.e., 
those contracts that contain DEAR clause 970.5204-2, Laws, Regulations, 
and DOE Directives). 
(2) Review initial and/or revised Contractor ECP implementing 
documentation. The Contracting Officer has 60 calendar days in which to 
provide DOE comments or approval of implementing documentation or 
revisions. 
(3) With respect to an Employee Concern raised by a contractor employee 
through the DOE ECP that has been Substantiated or Partially 
Substantiated by the DOE ECP Manager, Contracting Officers must: 
(a) Receive the report from the DOE ECP Manager describing the 
DOE ECP’s findings and making recommendations for resolution 
of the Employee Concern. 
(b) Direct the contractor to provide information explaining how the 
contractor will address the findings, and share that information 
with the DOE ECP Manager and the Field Office Manager (or, for 
headquarters matters, the appropriate Head of Departmental 
Element). 
(c) Transmit any Corrective Actions to the contractor that are 
approved by the Field Office Manager (or, for headquarters 
matters, the appropriate Head of Departmental Element). 
(4) Oversee contractor compliance with the CRD and any Corrective Actions 
issued to the contractors. 
(5) Notify the Office of Enterprise Assessments’ Office of Enforcement when 
a contractor employee files a complaint of Retaliation/Reprisal with an 
external entity, as soon as practicable after the Contracting Officer 
becomes aware of such filing. 
j. DOE Managers and Supervisors. 
(1) Support the right of federal and contractor employees to raise Employee 
Concerns without fear of Retaliation/Reprisal. 
(2) Cooperate with and support ECP investigations. 
(3) Process Employee Concerns that are referred or transferred to their 
respective organizations consistent with this Order in a prompt, effective, 
and respectful manner to provide for the safe and efficient operation of 
programs under their authority.

--- page 10 ---
10   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
(4) Implement Corrective Actions approved by the appropriate Head of 
Departmental Element or Field Office Manager; evaluate whether 
additional actions are needed to prevent recurrence of similar issues within 
their respective organization(s); and consult with the appropriate DOE 
ECP Manager, ECP Director, or subject matter experts, as needed. 
k. Employees. 
(1) Are encouraged to seek resolution through local complaint or dispute 
resolution systems, or with first line supervisors, but alternatively, have 
the right to report Employee Concerns through the ECP. 
(2) Have the right, without fear of Retaliation/Reprisal, to report Employee 
Concerns at any time. 
(3) Must inform the appropriate DOE ECP Manager if a remedy for the 
Employee Concern he or she has reported is being or has been pursued 
under other venues or other regulations. 
(4) Must cooperate with and support ECP investigations. 
6. REFERENCES.  
a. DOE O 221.1B, Reporting Fraud, Waste and Abuse to the Office of Inspector 
General, current version. 
b. DOE O 226.1B, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, 
current version. 
c. DOE O 243.1B, Records Management Program, current version. 
d. DOE O 442.2, Differing Professional Opinions for Technical Issues Involving 
Environmental, Safety, and Health Technical Concerns, current version. 
e. DOE O 470.4B, Safeguards and Security Program, current version. 
f. Title 10 C.F.R. part 708, DOE Contractor Employee Protection Program. 
g. Title 10 C.F.R. part 820, Procedural Rules for DOE Nuclear Activities. 
h. Title 10 C.F.R. part 851, Worker Safety and Health Program. 
i. Title 29 C.F.R. part 24, Procedures for the Handling of Retaliation Complaints 
Under the Employee Protection Provisions of Six Environmental Statutes and 
Section 211 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, as amended. 
j. Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, codified at 50 U.S.C. 
Section 2406(c).

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 442.1B  11 
1-31-2019 
 
 
k. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), as amended, 5 U.S.C. Section 552. 
l. Privacy Act of 1974 (Privacy Act), as amended, 5 U.S.C. Section 552a. 
7. DEFINITIONS. Capitalized terms not otherwise defined above have the meanings given 
to them in this Definitions section. 
a. Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). A process for resolving a dispute through 
a neutral third party. ADR may take the form of mediation or other techniques. To 
attempt resolution of an Employee Concern through ADR, all parties must 
voluntarily agree to utilize an ADR process. 
b. Anonymous Concern. An Employee Concern submitted by a Concerned 
Individual who does not reveal his/her identity. 
c. Assessment. A planned and documented activity performed to determine the 
adequacy of, and compliance with, established policies, procedures, and  other 
applicable documents and the effectiveness of their implementation. 
d. Concerned Individual. A current DOE/NNSA federal, contractor or subcontractor 
employee who expresses an Employee Concern through the ECP. 
e. Confidentiality. A request by an individual associated with an Employee Concern 
to have his or her identity protected, to the extent allowable by law, from all 
persons except ECP staff and those other individuals supporting the ECP that may 
have a need-to-know. 
f. Conflict-of-Interest. A situation in which the individual responsible for 
investigating an Employee Concern has either a direct or indirect association with 
the Employee Concern, including situations where the individual with processing 
or investigatory responsibility has or had a personal relationship related to the 
parties to the Employee Concern, or the Employee Concern itself, that may place 
his or her objectivity in question to an outside observer. 
g. Contracting Officer. A person with the authority to enter, administer, and/or 
terminate federal contracts on behalf of DOE and make related determinations 
and findings. The term includes authorized representatives of the Contracting 
Officer acting within the limits of their authority as delegated by the 
Contracting Officer. 
h. Corrective Action. An action taken to effectively address a Substantiated or 
Partially Substantiated Employee Concern and to prevent the recurrence of the 
issue(s) that led to the Employee Concern. 
i. Discrimination. Adverse treatment of a Concerned Individual because he/she 
raised an Employee Concern.

--- page 12 ---
12   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
j. DOE ECP Manager. The individual selected by a Head of a Departmental 
Element or Field Office Manager to lead the DOE ECP at headquarters or one or 
more Field Offices, or the person(s) the DOE ECP Manager designates to carry 
out his or her responsibilities under this Order. The ECP Director may also serve 
as the DOE ECP Manager for specified DOE headquarters employees. 
k. Duty-to-Act. The responsibility to immediately report to the cognizant federal 
manager responsible for the activity, and/or the applicable federal support office 
(e.g., safety or security) for the Field Office or facility, any Employee Concern 
that is associated with a potential imminent threat to national security, or 
imminent danger to an individual’s safety, public health or safety, and/or the 
environment, or that could otherwise compromise the safety and/or security of 
DOE operations and/or facilities. 
l. ECP Director. The individual in the Office of Environment, Health, Safety and 
Security who serves as point of contact for this Order, serves as the DOE ECP 
Manager for those DOE headquarters federal and contractor employees whose 
office does not otherwise have a DOE ECP Manager, and performs the other 
functions described in this Order. 
m. Employee. Any current DOE/NNSA federal or contractor employee working for or 
supporting a DOE or NNSA project. For purposes of this  Order, references to 
“contractor employees” includes contractor and subcontractor employees. 
n. Employee Concern. A good faith expression by a Concerned Individual that: 
(1) An activity, policy, or practice of DOE or one of its contractors or 
subcontractors—including but not limited to, that which is related to the 
environment, safety, health, security, quality, and management of DOE 
facilities and/or operations—should be improved, modified, or terminated; 
or 
(2) He or she has been subjected to HIRD (as defined in this Order) by DOE, 
or one or more of its contractors or subcontractors, for raising an 
Employee Concern. 
o. Field Office. Any of DOE’s officially established organizations and components, 
including project offices or operations offices, located outside the Washington, 
D.C. metropolitan area. 
p. Field Office Manager. An individual who is the manager or head of a Field 
Office, including a project office or operations office manager, or the person(s) 
the Field Office Manager designates to carry out his or her responsibilities under 
this Order. 
q. Harassment. A behavior or an action taken by one or more supervisors or co- 
workers against or toward a Concerned Individual to belittle, humiliate, or impede 
that Concerned Individual in his or her work environment or job performance

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 442.1B  13 
1-31-2019 
 
 
because the Concerned Individual raised an Employee Concern. Harassment may 
include, but is not limited to, threatening, restraining, coercing, blacklisting, 
mocking, humiliating, and/or isolating a Concerned Individual. 
r. Harassment, Intimidation, Retaliation/Reprisal, or Discrimination (HIRD). A type 
of Employee Concern that includes allegations of Harassment, Intimidation, 
Retaliation/Reprisal, or Discrimination for raising an Employee Concern. 
s. Heads of Departmental Elements. Heads of Departmental Elements include 
DOE’s Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, the NNSA Administrator, 
Program Office Directors, Power Marketing Administrators, or equivalent DOE 
officials, or any other official(s) the Head of Departmental Element designates to 
carry out his or her responsibilities under this Order. 
t. Intimidation. A behavior or an action taken by a supervisor or co-worker against 
or toward any employee to cause the employee to be fearful of filing an Employee 
Concern; cease from pursuing an Employee Concern; or otherwise be afraid for 
his/her safety or job security as a result of filing an Employee Concern. 
u. Partially Substantiated. A type of finding with respect to an Employee Concern in 
which the DOE ECP Manager has corroborated only part of an Employee 
Concern, based on supporting evidence. 
v. Referral of an Employee Concern. The forwarding of an Employee Concern from 
the DOE ECP Manager or Contractor ECP Manager to another office or program 
or subject matter expert for evaluation. Such referral does not transfer ultimate 
decision making authority over the Employee Concern to the office or program 
providing such evaluation. 
w. Retaliation/Reprisal. An adverse action taken against or toward a Concerned 
Individual with respect to employment (e.g., discharge, demotion, or other 
negative action with respect to the Concerned Individual’s compensation, terms, 
conditions or privileges of employment) because the employee raised an 
Employee Concern. 
x. Safety Conscious Work Environment . A work environment i n which employees 
feel free to raise safety concerns to management (and/or a regulator) without  fear 
of Retaliation/Reprisal. 
y. Safety Culture. An organization’s values and behaviors modeled by its leaders 
and internalized by its members, which serve to make safe performance of work 
the overriding priority to protect the workers, the public, and the environment. 
aa. Self-Assessment. The compliance and performance-based Assessment conducted 
by the DOE ECP Manager of its program.

--- page 14 ---
14   DOE O 442.1B 
  1-31-2019 
 
 
bb. Substantiated. A type of finding with respect to an Employee Concern in which 
the DOE ECP Manager has corroborated the Employee Concern based on 
supporting evidence. 
cc. Transfer of an Employee Concern. The relocation of an Employee Concern from 
the DOE ECP Manager or Contractor ECP Manager to another organization, 
when another resolution process exists to address the underlying issue(s) 
identified in the Employee Concern. Once transferred, the DOE ECP has no 
further responsibility to the Concerned Individual regarding the Employee 
Concern. 
dd. Unsubstantiated. A type of finding with respect to an Employee Concern in which 
the DOE ECP Manager has not been able to corroborate the Employee Concern 
based on supporting evidence. 
8. CONTACT. Questions surrounding this Order should be addressed to the ECP Director, 
Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security, at 202-586-6642. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
 DAN BROUILLETTE  
 Deputy Secretary

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 442.1B  Attachment 1 
1-31-2019  Page 1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 442.1B, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY EMPLOYEE CONCERNS PROGRAM 
 
Department of Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear Security Administration contractors that 
have this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) incorporated into their contracts are 
required to maintain an Employee Concerns Program (ECP) in accordance with this CRD. 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for compliance with the 
requirements of this CRD and for flowing down the requirements to subcontractors at all tiers to 
the extent necessary to ensure the contractor’s compliance with the CRD’s requirements. 
Pursuant to this CRD, the contractor must: 
1. Establish and maintain an ECP suitable for the organization to accept, process and resolve 
employee concerns in a timely manner. 
2. Provide means to inform contractor and subcontractor employees regarding their rights 
and responsibilities to raise any employee concern related, but not limited to, the 
environment, safety, health, security, quality, and management of DOE facilities and 
operations, as well as harassment, intimidation, retaliation/reprisal, or discrimination, to 
the contractor’s ECP or the DOE ECP. 
3. Cooperate with and assist the DOE ECP Manager and his/her representatives in (i) 
assessments of the contractor’s ECP program by the DOE ECP Manager, and (ii) the 
processing of contractor employee concerns that are submitted to the DOE ECP. This 
includes, but is not limited to, responding to the allegations in the employee concern, and 
making pertinent information, including relevant documentation, available to the DOE 
ECP Manager and his/her representatives, as necessary for DOE to address the submitted 
concern. 
4. Implement corrective actions as directed by the contracting officer or his/her 
representatives. 
5. Notify the contracting officer when the contractor becomes aware that a contractor 
employee has filed a formal complaint of retaliation/reprisal, including a complaint 
submitted pursuant to 10 CFR part 708, DOE Contractor Employee Protection Program; 
41 U.S.C. § 4712, Enhancement of Contractor Protection from Reprisal for Disclosure of 
Certain Information, or a complaint filed with the U.S. Department of Labor under 
29 C.F.R. part 24, Procedures for Handling Retaliation Complaints. 
6. At least every six months, or more frequently if requested by the DOE ECP director, 
provide a summary of employee concerns activity data with respect to the contractor’s 
ECP to the DOE ECP director and the appropriate DOE ECP Manager, through the Field 
Office Manager (or Head of Departmental Element, as applicable), or their respective 
designees.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 1  DOE O 442.1B 
Page 2  1-31-2019 
 
 
7. As a means of establishing an effective program, the contractor’s ECP should utilize ECP 
best practices, which may include, but are not limited to: 
a. Ensuring that there is an ECP Manager who reports to a designated executive in 
the contractor management chain; 
b. Establishing a case-file system of documentation and records for concerns raised; 
c. Establishing a process that provides anonymity and confidentiality for employees 
who raise concerns unless the contractor is legally compelled to disclose such 
information; 
d. Providing avenues for informal resolution of concerns; 
e. Allowing for the use of alternate dispute resolution; 
f. Referring concerns to other appropriate organizations to investigate a concern; 
and 
g. Documenting acceptance or dismissal of a concern, including “closure” of a 
concern after an investigation into its merits. 
The complete implementing documentation for the contractor’s ECP must be provided to the 
contracting officer no later than 90 calendar days after date that this CRD becomes incorporated 
into an existing contract or by the effective date of a new contract that incorporates this CRD. 
The contracting officer has 60 calendar days in which to provide DOE comments or approval.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 442.1B  Appendix A 
1-31-2019  Page 1 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO DOE ECPs 
 
DOE ECP Managers are responsible for (i) developing ECP implementing documentation that 
sets forth the policies and procedures to be followed by the DOE ECP, (ii) obtaining approval 
of the ECP implementing documentation from the appropriate Head of Departmental Element 
or Field Office Manager, and (iii) implementing the DOE ECP in accordance with the approved 
implementing documentation. The implementing documentation must address the following: 
1. Intake, Processing of Employee Concerns, and Confidentiality. 
a. Intake of Employee Concerns. When a Concerned Individual initiates an 
Employee Concern, the DOE ECP Manager must perform an intake with the 
Concerned Individual, if the identity of the Concerned Individual is known, to 
clearly understand and document the Employee Concern. 
b. Processing of Employee Concerns. The DOE ECP Manager must inform the 
Concerned Individual about the ECP process and may inform the Concerned 
Individual of other formal and informal avenues of redress available to the 
Concerned Individual to attempt to resolve an Employee Concern. 
c. Confidentiality.1 Records created or maintained as part of the ECP are federal 
records and, where applicable, are subject to the Privacy Act and/or the Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA). To the extent possible, the DOE ECP Manager must 
protect the identities of the individual(s) who identify concerns, any individual(s) 
who are subject(s) of the concern, and/or information that may compromise the 
identity of individuals interviewed or named by interviewees in connection with 
the investigation. 
(1) A Concerned Individual may submit an Employee Concern without 
revealing his/her identity, in which case the Employee Concern is referred 
to as an Anonymous Concern. 
(2) If a Concerned Individual or a witness requests Confidentiality, the DOE 
ECP Manager must maintain Confidentiality to the greatest extent 
possible. The DOE ECP Manager must inform the Concerned Individual 
of the limitations on protection of Confidentiality under circumstances 
such as: 
                                                 
1 Confidentiality is the cornerstone of an effective ECP. Situations exist in which Concerned Individuals may fear 
Retaliation/Reprisal or Intimidation by supervisors or co-workers if they provide information to the ECP. 
Recognizing that some individuals will raise Employee Concerns only if they believe their identiti es will not be 
disclosed, the protection of the identity of these individuals is a significant factor in ensuring cooperation of 
Concerned Individuals.

--- page 18 ---
Appendix A  DOE O 442.1B 
Page 2  1-31-2019 
 
 
(a) The existence of a Duty-to-Act (additional information regarding 
the Duty-to-Act is provided in paragraph 3.a. of this Attachment); 
(b) Disclosure or reporting required by law, rule, regulation, court 
order or DOE Order; 
(c) The extent to which an employee may be identified with the 
Employee Concern (e.g., the employee has previously voiced the 
Employee Concern, in whole or part, to a supervisor or co- 
workers; the uniqueness of the Employee Concern); and 
(d) The extent to which Confidentiality may impact the DOE ECP’s 
ability to thoroughly investigate an Employee Concern. 
2. Documentation; Records. The DOE ECP Manager must document an Employee Concern 
in an ECP case file (hard copy and/or electronic) in sufficient detail to permit processing. 
a. The DOE ECP Manager must maintain any supporting documentation and/or 
evidence provided by the Concerned Individual, or obtained or prepared by the 
DOE ECP Manager, in the Concerned Individual’s ECP case file. 
b. DOE ECP case files and other relevant records must be maintained in accordance 
with DOE O 243.1B, Records Management Program, and other applicable laws, 
regulations, Departmental directives and direction. 
c. The DOE ECP Manager must also maintain necessary records to track the 
following information: 
(1) Number of Employee Concerns, 
(2) Categories of Employee Concerns, 
(3) Disposition of Employee Concerns, 
(4) Timeframes for resolving Employee Concerns, and 
(5) Other measures that may be requested by the ECP Director. 
d. As directed by the ECP Director, the DOE ECP Manager must enter information 
described above in paragraph 2.c. of this Attachment into the ECP agency-wide 
system for tracking and trending the types and numbers of Employee Concerns. 
3. Screening of Employee Concerns. 
a. Duty to Act. When an Employee Concern is received, the DOE ECP Manager 
must perform an initial screening of the Employee Concern to evaluate whether 
there is a Duty-to-Act. If the DOE ECP Manager determines there is a Duty-to- 
Act, required notifications and any other appropriate action must be taken

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 442.1B  Appendix A 
1-31-2019  Page 3 
 
 
immediately. The DOE ECP Manager must notify the Concerned Individual, if 
the identity of the Concerned Individual is known, of a Duty-to-Act situation. The 
DOE ECP Manager may suspend the processing of an Employee Concern until 
after a Duty-to-Act notification or other related action, and must resume the 
processing of the Employee Concern in a timely manner. 
b. The intent of the ECP screening process is to provide a consistent method by 
which each Employee Concern is reviewed and evaluated, and a path for 
resolution is identified. The screening must be performed in a time period 
consistent with the nature and severity of the Employee Concern. 
c. During the screening process, the DOE ECP Manager must: 
(1) Identify any required notifications to other organizations. 
(2) Identify any potential or perceived Conflict-of-Interest in the processing of 
the Employee Concern. In the event such conflicts are identified, 
mitigation measures must be documented. 
(3) Consider appropriate methods by which to process the Employee Concern, 
consistent with paragraph 4 of this Attachment. 
4. Methods for Processing Employee Concerns. In processing an Employee Concern, the 
DOE ECP Manager must use one or more of the following methods as appropriate: 
a. Dismissal. The DOE ECP Manager may dismiss an Employee Concern when 
appropriate (e.g., when the Employee Concern is outside the scope of the ECP, 
and transfer of the Employee Concern to another organization is not appropriate; 
or when the DOE ECP Manager determines that the Employee Concern is too 
general to investigate or has not been made in good faith). 
b. Informal Resolution. In those instances when a Concerned Individual has raised 
an issue that does not meet the definition of “Employee Concern,” the DOE ECP 
Manager may determine if there are informal means to close the issue, and the 
DOE ECP Manager may decide to pursue such informal means. 
c. Withdrawal. Upon written or verbal request, the Concerned Individual may 
withdraw an Employee Concern at any time. 
d. ADR. ADR may be used as a mechanism for resolving an Employee Concern. 
ADR involves the use of a neutral third party and may take the form of mediation 
or other techniques. To resolve an Employee Concern through ADR, all parties 
must voluntarily agree to utilize the ADR process. 
e. Transfer of an Employee Concern to Another Organization. The DOE ECP 
Manager may transfer an Employee Concern in writing to another organization 
with subject matter expertise, or when another established resolution process 
exists to address the Employee Concern raised (e.g., the Differing Professional

--- page 20 ---
Appendix A  DOE O 442.1B 
Page 4  1-31-2019 
 
 
Opinions process under DOE O 442.2, Differing Professional Opinions for 
Technical Issues Involving Environment, Safety and Health Technical Concerns).  
If an Employee Concern is transferred to another organization: 
(1) The DOE ECP Manager must inform the Concerned Individual of the 
transfer of the Employee Concern if the identity of the Concerned 
Individual is known. 
(2) The office that accepts the transfer will have responsibility and jurisdiction 
to address the Employee Concern and is responsible for communicating 
the results to the Concerned Individual if the identity of the Concerned 
Individual is known. 
(3) Once transferred, the DOE ECP has no further responsibility to the 
Concerned Individual regarding the Employee Concern. 
(4) Note:  The DOE ECP Manager may transfer an Employee Concern raised 
by a contractor employee to the Contractor ECP for action only in cases 
where, after consultation, the contractor employee and the DOE ECP 
Manager agree that such transfer is appropriate.   
f. Referral of an Employee Concern to Another Organization. The DOE ECP 
Manager may refer an Employee Concern in writing to another office or program 
for evaluation. Such referral does not transfer ultimate decision making authority 
over the Employee Concern to the office or program providing such evaluation. 
(1) If an Employee Concern is referred to another organization, the DOE ECP 
Manager must inform the Concerned Individual of the referral if the 
identity of the Concerned Individual is known. 
(2) Upon accepting the concern, the receiving office is responsible for 
investigating the Employee Concern and documenting its findings to the 
DOE ECP Manager. 
(3) The DOE ECP Manager must evaluate the response to verify it addresses 
the Employee Concern. The DOE ECP Manager may investigate further if 
the response does not fully address the Employee Concern. 
(4) Note: The DOE ECP Manager may refer an Employee Concern raised by 
a contractor employee to the Contractor ECP for action in cases where, 
after consultation, the contractor employee and the DOE ECP Manager 
agree that such referral is appropriate. As in the case of other referrals, the 
DOE ECP Manager must evaluate the response from the Contractor ECP 
to verify it addresses the Employee Concern.  The DOE ECP Manager 
may investigate further if the response does not fully address the 
Employee Concern.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 442.1B  Appendix A 
1-31-2019  Page 5 
 
 
g. Investigation. The DOE ECP Manager may initiate an investigation to examine an 
Employee Concern. The investigation may involve interviews, inspection of 
relevant documents, sites, or equipment, and an evaluation of practices being 
followed. The DOE ECP Manager may bring in outside subject matter experts to 
help conduct investigations. ECP investigations should provide sufficient 
evidence to allow the DOE ECP Manager to determine if the Employee Concern 
is Substantiated, Partially Substantiated or Unsubstantiated. 
5. Closure of Employee Concerns. An Employee Concern must be tracked until closure. 
The goal of the ECP is to close Employee Concerns within 90 calendar days from date of 
receipt of the Employee Concern. However, closure of the Employee Concern will 
depend on the supporting information and circumstances of the Employee Concern. An 
Employee Concern is considered closed when one of the following has occurred and been 
documented by the DOE ECP Manager in the ECP case file: 
a. The Employee Concern has been dismissed by the DOE ECP Manager or resolved 
informally. 
b. The Concerned Individual has withdrawn the Employee Concern and the nature of 
the Employee Concern does not require further evaluation or action. 
c. The Employee Concern has been resolved through ADR. 
d. The Employee Concern has been transferred to another organization. 
e. The Employee Concern has been investigated and/or otherwise addressed by the 
organization to whom the concern was referred, and the following steps have been 
taken: 
(1) The organization to whom the concern was referred has documented its 
findings to the DOE ECP Manager, and the DOE ECP Manager has 
evaluated the response to verify it addresses the Employee Concern. 
(2) The DOE ECP Manager has communicated the results to the Concerned 
Individual if the identity of the Concerned Individual is known. 
(3) The DOE ECP Manager has briefed management on any issues for 
management attention. 
f. The Employee Concern has been investigated by the DOE ECP Manager to 
determine if the Employee Concern is Substantiated, Partially Substantiated or 
Unsubstantiated, and the following steps have been taken: 
(1) The DOE ECP Manager has prepared a written report describing the DOE 
ECP Manager’s findings. 
(2) If the Employee Concern has been Substantiated or Partially Substantiated 
by the DOE ECP Manager:

--- page 22 ---
Appendix A  DOE O 442.1B 
Page 6  1-31-2019 
 
 
(a) If the Concerned Individual is a federal employee, the report must 
include the DOE ECP Manager’s recommendations for resolution 
of the Employee Concern, and the DOE ECP Manager must 
provide a copy of such report to the Field Office Manager (or, for 
headquarters matters, the appropriate Head of Departmental 
Element). 
(b) If a Concerned Individual is a contractor employee, the report must 
include the DOE ECP Manager’s recommendations for resolution 
of the Employee Concern, and the DOE ECP Manager must 
provide a copies of such report to the appropriate Contracting 
Officer and Field Office Manager (or, for headquarters matters, the 
appropriate Head of Departmental Element). 
(c) The DOE ECP Manager must document the response of DOE 
management and/or the contractor (as applicable) to the Employee 
Concern in the ECP file. 
(d) Any Corrective Actions approved by the Field Office Manager (or, 
for headquarters matters, the appropriate Head of Departmental 
Element) must be identified and captured in a tracking system, and 
their completion documented. The DOE ECP Manager must 
inform appropriate levels of DOE management when actions are 
either ineffective or not timely in resolving Employee Concerns or 
correcting identified issues. 
(3) The Concerned Individual, if the Concerned Individual’s identity is 
known, has been notified regarding the disposition of the Employee 
Concern (e.g., whether the Employee Concern was Substantiated, Partially 
Substantiated, or Unsubstantiated, and any Corrective Actions taken). 
Note: to protect the Confidentiality of those who provided information or 
other input to an investigation, the specifics of the investigation must not 
be provided in the closure summary provided to the Concerned Individual. 
6. Reports; Assessments. 
a. Reports. DOE ECP Managers must prepare reports at least every six months for 
their respective DOE ECPs, including the information in paragraph 2.c. of this 
Appendix, and provide a copy of such reports to the ECP Director. The DOE ECP 
Manager must review the reports with the Head of Departmental Element, or Field 
Office Manager, as appropriate, for lessons learned and possible trends. 
b. Assessments. 
(1) The DOE ECP Manager must conduct a compliance and performance- 
based Self-Assessment of its ECP program within one year of program 
approval, and then at least once every two years afterwards. The DOE 
ECP Manager must document the results in a Self-Assessment report, and

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 442.1B  Appendix A 
1-31-2019  Page 7 
 
 
provide a copy of the report to the ECP Director. The DOE ECP Manager 
must review the Self-Assessment reports with the Head of Departmental 
Element, or Field Office Manager, as appropriate, for lessons learned and 
possible trends. Problems that hinder the ECP from achieving its 
objectives must be identified and corrected. 
(2) The DOE ECP Manager must perform Assessments of each new 
Contractor ECP within one year of program plan approval, and at least 
once every two years thereafter. 
(3) The DOE ECP Manager may conduct additional Assessments of federal 
Field Office and contractor organizations, as appropriate, in support of a 
positive Safety Culture and a Safety Conscious Work Environment.  
7. Promoting Awareness of the ECP. The process and methods (e.g., website, brochures, 
posters, emails, and continuing training) by which the DOE ECP Manager will publicize 
the role and availability of both the Contractor’s ECP and the DOE ECP, including how 
and where Employee Concerns can be raised and information on employee rights and 
responsibilities to report Employee Concerns. 
a. New Employees. Employees must be notified of the ECP upon being hired (e.g., 
new employee orientation, brochures, emails). 
b. Existing Employees. On at least an annual basis, existing employees must be 
notified of the availability of the ECP.  For Field Offices, the DOE ECP Manager 
shall coordinate with the Field Office Manager to provide the content of the 
annual notice regarding the DOE ECP. The ECP Director provides support to the 
Deputy Secretary in preparing the annual notice to federal and contractor 
employees regarding the ECP.   
8. Organization/Structure/Interface. The process that the DOE ECP Manager will use to 
disposition Employee Concerns in an independent and objective manner, and how the 
DOE ECP Manager will coordinate with appropriate organizations in the resolution of 
Employee Concerns. This includes a description of the way in which: 
a. The DOE ECP Manager can operate independently from line management and 
actions which require line management involvement; 
b. The DOE ECP Manager will have direct access to the head of the organization or 
his or her designee; and 
c. The DOE ECP Manager will interface with other organizations (e.g., legal 
counsel; human resources; health, safety, security, environment and quality 
assurance) to evaluate Employee Concerns in an independent and objective 
manner.

--- page 24 ---
Appendix A  DOE O 442.1B 
Page 8  1-31-2019 
 
 
9. Training and Qualification. The process by which personnel responsible for 
implementing the ECP or investigating Employee Concerns must be sufficiently trained 
to properly carry out their responsibilities.
