--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of the Chief Information Officer 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE.  To set forth requirements and responsibilities for creating and preserving 
records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, 
policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the Department of Energy 
(DOE) and to provide information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of 
the government and persons directly affected by DOE activities. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 243.1C, Records Management Program, dated 
February 7, 2022.  Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise 
affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive.  The 
Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) incorporated into a contract remains in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified either to eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
to substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability.  Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in 
paragraph 3.c., this Order applies to all DOE elements.  The Administrator of the 
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) must ensure that NNSA 
employees comply with their responsibilities under this Order.  Nothing in this 
Order will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority 
under Section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65, National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, to establish Administration-specific 
policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
DOE O 243.1D

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 243.1D 
 08-05-2026 
b. DOE Contractors. 
(1) The requirements of this Order shall be incorporated into applicable 
contracts, including Management and Operating (M&O) contracts.  The 
contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD, 
if applicable.  Contractors shall comply with the requirements of 
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations in carrying out the 
requirements of this Order unless relief has been granted in writing.  
Omission of any applicable law or regulation from the Order does not 
affect the obligation of the contractor to comply with such law or 
regulation.  Contractors must comply with the requirements of this Order, 
except to the extent modified by the equivalencies or exemptions 
identified herein or issued to the contractor in writing by DOE utilizing the 
process outlined in DOE O 251.1E, Departmental Directives Program, 
including as amended or updated.  Equivalencies/Exemptions.  
Equivalencies and exemptions to this Order are processed in accordance 
with DOE O 251.1, current version. 
c. Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities assigned by 
Executive Order (EO) 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, codified at 
50 U.S.C. § 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, and § 2511 and to 
ensure consistency throughout the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion 
Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement 
and oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for activities 
under the Director's cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. DOE shall implement a Records Management Program to comply with all 
applicable requirements of the Federal Records Act and 36 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Chapter XII, Subchapter B, Records Management, including 
but not limited to requirements governing: 
(1) Records creation, maintenance, use, and disposition. 
(2) Records schedules and unscheduled records, including requirements that 
unscheduled records must be retained, protected, and may not be 
destroyed until disposition authority is approved by the National Archives 
and Records Administration (NARA). 
(3) In accordance with OMB M-19-21, Memorandum for Heads of Executive 
Departments and Agencies, all DOE federal records must be managed in 
electronic format to the fullest extent possible.  Electronic records 
management includes:

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 243.1D 3 
08-05-2026 
(a) The creation, capture, management, retention, preservation, 
metadata management, and disposition of federal records in 
electronic formats in accordance with applicable federal records 
laws, regulations, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
and NARA records management transition requirements. 
(b) The integration of records management requirements into the 
design, development, acquisition, operation, migration, 
decommissioning, and replacement of electronic information 
systems of record. 
(c) The development of controls that preserve the authenticity, 
reliability, integrity, usability, and accessibility of records for 
required retention periods. 
(d) Electronic communications management, where email and other 
electronic messaging (including instant messages, text messages, 
chat platforms, and social media) are used to conduct official 
business, must be managed in accordance with 36 CFR § 1236.22, 
Electronic Records Management.  Electronic communications that 
meet the definition of federal records under 44 U.S.C. § 3301, 
Definition of records, must be captured and preserved in 
accordance with NARA-approved disposition schedules. 
Official business requiring the use of electronic communications 
must be conducted using authorized federal systems.  If any 
official business were to be conducted through non-official 
accounts, those communications must be forwarded to or otherwise 
captured in an authorized federal system within 20 days of creation 
or receipt. 
(4) System migration and technological obsolescence.  When electronic 
information systems that maintain federal records are retired, replaced, or 
migrated, DOE elements must ensure that records and associated metadata 
are successfully transferred to successor systems or other appropriate 
storage in a manner that preserves record integrity, authenticity, and 
accessibility.  DOE elements must plan for technological obsolescence to 
ensure records remain usable and accessible until authorized disposition.  
Verification of successful migration must be documented. 
(5) Transfer and accessioning of permanent records.  Permanent electronic 
records shall be transferred to NARA in NARA-approved formats and 
with associated metadata required to support identification, context, 
management, and preservation, in accordance with applicable NARA 
regulations and guidance.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 243.1D 
 08-05-2026 
(6) The designation of a records management office and DOE Departmental 
Records Officer (DRO) with appropriate authority to: 
(a) Establish, oversee, and coordinate the Program. 
(b) Coordinate notification to NARA of officials authorized to approve 
records schedules and transfers. 
(7) The creation and maintenance of records inventories and file plans. 
(8) Essential (vital) records programs, including the identification, protection, 
duplication, and accessibility of records necessary to support continuity of 
operations and protect the legal rights of DOE. 
(9) The issuance and dissemination of records management directives 
establishing Program roles, responsibilities, and authorities. 
(10) Records maintenance, organization, indexing, and retrieval control to 
ensure records remain accessible, usable, and protected for the duration of 
their retention periods. 
(11) Records management training and guidance for all DOE personnel and 
contractors as applicable. 
(12) Measures to prevent, detect, and report on the unlawful or accidental 
removal, defacing, alteration, or destruction of records in accordance with 
36 CFR Part 1230, Unlawful or Accidental Removal, Defacing, 
Alteration, or Destruction of Records. 
(13) Compliance with requirements governing the storage of records in DOE 
facilities, Federal Records Centers, and commercial records 
storage facilities. 
(14) Periodic evaluation of the Program to assess effectiveness and compliance 
with applicable regulations, including results of evaluations and corrective 
action plans to be reported to NARA as appropriate. 
(15) Records created, received, or maintained by DOE contractors, as 
implemented through the CRD (Attachment 1), including requirements for 
ownership, delivery, retention, and disposition. 
(16) Identification and distinction of federal records from nonrecord materials, 
and management of nonrecord materials in accordance with applicable 
law.  Contractor obligations related to the identification and distinction of 
federal records are governed by the CRD (Attachment 1).

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 243.1D 5 
08-05-2026 
b. In addition to the requirements set in a., the Program shall: 
(1) Establish Records Disposition Schedules (RDSs) and adopt applicable 
National Archives and Records Administration General Records 
Schedules (GRSs) as authoritative instructions for retention practices and 
distinguishing records from nonrecords. 
(2) Disseminate new or revised schedules as appropriate. 
(3) Maintain a process for requesting extended retention approvals. 
(4) Support the timely transfer of permanent records to NARA and authorized 
disposal of temporary records in accordance with approved schedules and 
NARA procedures. 
(5) Conduct all required reviews to safeguard controlled unclassified 
information (CUI) and classified material prior to the transfer and 
accessioning of records.  Permanent classified records must undergo 
declassification review in accordance with Executive Order 13526, 
Classified National Security Information, and 32 CFR 2001, Classified 
National Security Information, prior to transfer to NARA.  
Declassification review documentation must accompany transferred 
records.  DOE elements must report newly identified permanent classified 
record collections requiring declassification review to appropriate 
classification authorities and the DRO within 30 days of discovery. 
(6) Preserve records subject to litigation holds, freezes, audits, investigations, 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), or Privacy Act obligations until 
formally released in writing by the issuing authority.  Holds must be 
scoped to specific record categories.  Nothing in this Order alters 
disclosure authorities or exemptions under 5 U.S.C. § 552, Public 
information; agency rules, opinions, orders, records, and proceedings, or 
5 U.S.C. § 552a, Records maintained on individuals; it establishes 
preservation and recordkeeping controls to ensure DOE can meet those 
legal obligations. 
(7) In coordination with DOE’s FOIA and transparency functions, support the 
identification of records of general interest or use to the public that are 
appropriate for public disclosure, and facilitate their availability in 
publicly accessible electronic formats, consistent with applicable law, 
exemptions, and Departmental authorities.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 243.1D 
 08-05-2026 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Secretary of Energy.  Ensure DOE establishes and maintains an active, continuing 
Records Management Program in accordance with federal law. 
b. DOE Senior Agency Official for Records Management. 
(1) Provide executive oversight of DOE’s Records Management Program and 
ensures Department-wide compliance with the requirements of this Order 
and applicable federal records laws and regulations. 
(2) Designate officials and groups as necessary to support the Records 
Management Program. 
(3) Provide required reports to NARA and supports records management 
oversight activities. 
c. DOE Departmental Records Officer. 
(1) Manage and oversees implementation of the DOE Records Management 
Program, including records scheduling, transfers, storage, program 
evaluation, contractor records, integration with information systems, and 
coordination with NARA. 
(2) Establish subordinate roles, working groups, and procedures as necessary 
to carry out Program requirements. 
d. DOE Departmental Essential Records Manager. 
(1) Establish and coordinate an Essential Records Program, maintaining 
inventories, training documentation, records-protection measures, 
evaluation measures, and emergency plans. 
(2) Develop and maintain an Essential Records Plan, including the Essential 
Records Packet. 
e. Heads of DOE Elements. 
(1) Establish and sustain element-level records management programs 
consistent with this Order and applicable federal laws and regulations. 
(2) Designate appropriate records management officials to support the 
program established in (1). 
(3) Ensure all DOE personnel comply with program, Order, and federal 
records management requirements and that contractors comply with the 
CRD (Attachment 1).

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 243.1D 7 
08-05-2026 
f. Records Management Officials. 
(1) Support records identification, scheduling, storage, transfers, training, and 
compliance monitoring as appropriate. 
(2) Implement records-management activities and procedures developed by 
their respective DOE Element Head. 
g. DOE Workforce. 
(1) Identify records created, received, or used on behalf of DOE. 
(2) Manage records in accordance with approved schedules and procedures. 
(3) Complete records management training as required. 
(4) Prevent unauthorized removal or destruction of scheduled and 
unscheduled records. 
h. Enabling Functions (Information Technology, Contracting, Legal, Classification). 
(1) Ensure systems, contracts, sensitivity reviews, and controls enable 
compliance with records management requirements. 
i. Contracting Officer. 
(1) For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a site/facility 
management contract is affected by this order, incorporate the 
requirements into the affected contract(s) via the “Laws, Regulations, and 
DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or through negotiation and 
modification, as appropriate. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS.  This Order does not invoke any DOE technical standards or 
industry standards as required methods.  NOTE:  DOE O 251.1, current version, provides 
a definition for “invoked technical standard.” 
7. REFERENCES.  See Attachment 2. 
8. DEFINITIONS.  See Attachment 3. 
9. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Departmental 
Records Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, at doerm@hq.doe.gov 
or (301) 903-3455. 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 8 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1  
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (CRD) 
DOE O 243.1D, RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
This CRD establishes requirements for Department of Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA) contractors who create or maintain federal records in 
connection with the performance of DOE-funded tasks or activities. 
The contractor is responsible for complying with the requirements of this CRD, regardless of 
who performs the work.  The contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this 
CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the contractor’s compliance 
with the requirements. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this CRD, contractors are responsible for complying 
with Attachments 2 and 3 to DOE O 243.1D, which provide program information applicable to 
contracts in which this CRD is inserted. 
This CRD does not apply to contractor-owned records.  Contractor-owned records are records 
not identified as federal records, including company proprietary information, records unrelated to 
work performed under the DOE contract, corporate governance records, and other similar 
records that belong to the contractor.  Contractor-owned records are defined in the contract 
and/or through 48 CFR § 970.5204-3, Access to and ownership of records. Privacy Act systems 
of record maintained on behalf of DOE (Federal Acquisition Regulation [FAR] 52.224-2, 
Privacy Act) are federal records and are not contractor-owned records. 
Contractors are not required to manage non-record materials as defined in 36 CFR § 1220.18, 
What definitions apply to the regulations in Subchapter B? including extra copies kept only for 
reference, transitory communications, and other materials excluded from the statutory definition 
of federal records, as further described in Requirement 1. 
1. REQUIREMENTS: 
a. Contractors shall manage records created, received, or maintained under 
DOE-funded work that meet the definition of federal records under 
44 U.S.C. § 3301, Definition of Records, in accordance with federal records 
laws and regulations. 
Contractors are not required to manage non-record materials as defined in 
36 CFR § 1220.18, including extra copies kept only for reference, transitory 
communications, and other materials excluded from the statutory definition of 
federal records. 
Nothing in this CRD alters the statutory definition of federal records under 
44 U.S.C. § 3301.  DOE retains responsibility for ensuring adequate and proper 
documentation of its mission and activities.

--- page 9 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 243.1D 
Page 1-2 08-05-2026 
 
b. Implement records-management practices sufficient to identify, protect, retain, 
and dispose of federal records in accordance with DOE-approved disposition 
authorities.  Contractors are not required to replicate DOE’s internal records 
governance structures. 
c. Designate a single records management point of contact responsible for 
coordinating contractor records management activities with DOE-designated 
record officials.  Contractors may assign additional internal support roles at their 
discretion based on organizational needs, contract scope, or risk. 
d. Store records in a manner that ensures accessibility, retrievability, security, and 
preservation consistent with the retention and preservation requirements 
applicable to the federal records defined in this CRD. 
e. Store records electronically when cost-effective and reasonably practicable.  This 
CRD does not impose unfunded digitization or records remediation requirements.  
Where digitization, conversion, or remediation is required, DOE will provide 
written direction and address resourcing. 
f. Maintain inventories and file plans only for designated records management 
systems or repositories that contain federal records.  DOE may request submission 
of inventories and file plans for designated records management systems when 
necessary for defined oversight purposes.  Routine submissions are not required 
unless otherwise specified by contract clause.  Requested updates to the file plan 
should be limited to material changes from the prior submission. 
g. Manage and dispose of federal records only in accordance with DOE-approved 
Records Disposition Schedules or applicable National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA) General Records Schedules as designated by DOE. 
h. Preserve records beyond their approved retention periods when they have been 
placed under a destruction hold, freeze, or moratorium for purposes of audits, 
inspections, investigations, litigation, Freedom of Information Act, or similar 
obligations.  Where FAR 52.224-2 is included in the contract, contractors shall 
comply with its requirements.  Holds shall be issued in writing, scoped to specific 
record categories, and reviewed at least annually by DOE for continued necessity.  
DOE will provide written release of the hold when it is no longer necessary; 
contractors may request scope reduction or release with supporting rationale.  
DOE shall respond to contractor requests within 60 days.  If no direction is 
provided, the contractor shall notify the Departmental Records Officer (DRO) in 
writing and request further guidance.  A hold suspends all disposition actions for 
covered records effective upon contractor receipt of the written hold notice. 
i. Promptly report any actual, impending, or suspected unlawful or accidental 
removal, defacing, alteration, corruption, deletion, erasure, or destruction of 
DOE records to the Contracting Officer and the DOE-designated Records 
Management Official, to enable DOE to meet its notification and recovery 
obligations to NARA.

--- page 10 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-3  
 
j. Sufficiently document authorized destruction of federal records to demonstrate 
compliance with approved disposition authority. 
k. DOE is responsible for the formal transfer or accessioning of permanent federal 
records to NARA.  Contractors shall provide permanent federal records to DOE in 
the form and condition in which they are maintained in the ordinary course of 
contract performance, unless DOE provides written direction specifying 
additional preparation, conversion, or digitization.  Electronic records must be 
provided with associated metadata maintained in the ordinary course of business 
sufficient to preserve context and usability. 
Contractors shall not be required to transfer or accession records directly to 
NARA unless expressly directed by DOE in writing and reflected in the contract.  
Where transfer or accession is required, DOE will provide written direction and 
address resourcing. 
Contractors are not required to digitize, convert, migrate, or reformat records 
solely for NARA transfer purposes unless expressly directed and funded by DOE. 
Where records cannot be transferred at the time of contract completion, 
contractors shall preserve them in their existing format and storage environment 
in a manner that protects against loss, damage, or unauthorized destruction, 
pending DOE direction.  DOE shall provide disposition direction within 180 days 
of contract completion.  If no direction is provided, the contractor shall notify the 
DRO in writing and request further guidance. 
l. Ensure that personnel who create or manage federal records under this CRD 
complete role-based training.  Contractors shall not be required to provide training 
metrics absent written DOE request. 
m. Ensure records remain under organizational custody and control upon 
personnel departure. 
n. Support DOE-directed records management evaluations.  DOE may conduct 
contractor records management upon the following defined trigger events: 
(1) Documented record loss, compromise, or substantiated audit finding 
involving recordkeeping. 
(2) Contract transition or closeout. 
(3) Written determination by the Senior Agency Official for Records 
Management that a specific, documented legal or statutory risk 
requires review.

--- page 11 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 243.1D 
Page 1-4 08-05-2026 
 
DOE retains the discretion to conduct evaluations as necessary to ensure 
compliance with applicable records management laws and regulations.  
Evaluations shall be limited to designated records management systems that 
maintain federal records under this CRD.  Routine or recurring evaluation cycles 
are not required under this CRD.  Evaluations will not require the production of 
contractor proprietary or privileged materials unless required under contract 
or law. 
o. Provide DOE access to federal records created or maintained under the contract, 
as required to support audits, inspections, litigation, investigations, or other 
authorized government purposes, consistent with contract terms. 
p. Ensure electronic systems designated to maintain federal records under this CRD 
provide sufficient controls to preserve the authenticity, reliability, integrity, 
usability, and accessibility of records for the duration of their approved retention 
periods.  These controls are required only for electronic systems that DOE 
designates in writing as records management systems for specific record 
categories under this CRD. 
These requirements do not apply to general-purpose collaboration or productivity 
tools unless designated as records management systems. 
q. Manage electronic communications, including email, instant messages, texts, 
chats, collaboration messages, and artificial-intelligence-assisted chat content that 
meet the definition of federal records under 44 U.S.C. § 3301, Definition of 
Records, and in accordance with 36 CFR § 1236.22, Electronic Records 
Management. Communications that do not meet this definition are not required to 
be captured or preserved. 
(1) Contractors are not required to implement Capstone or role-based email 
preservation unless expressly required by contract clause.  Email messages 
documenting final decisions, authorizations, commitments, or essential 
transactions as defined in this CRD shall be preserved.  Transitory 
messages, including scheduling, informational notices, and routine 
coordination, are not required to be preserved. 
(2) Instant messages, texts, chats, collaboration messages, and artificial-
intelligence-assisted chat content are not required to be captured as records 
unless the communication contains the only documentation of a decision, 
authorization, or essential transaction as defined in this CRD and is not 
captured in another records management system.  Contractors should 
establish policies discouraging the use of ephemeral platforms for 
documenting final decisions or essential transactions.

--- page 12 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-5  
 
(3) Public-facing social media and externally hosted web content shall be 
captured when constituting official DOE communications or 
announcements.  Routine engagement, comment responses, and 
duplicative cross-posting are not required to be captured unless they 
contain unique official content. 
r. Support DOE’s Essential Records Program by identifying and protecting records 
specifically designated in writing by DOE as essential. 
s. Ensure departing employees identify and transfer records in their custody and 
ensure that all Scientific and Technical Information records are submitted in 
accordance with DOE Order 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information 
Management, as well as all requirements related to electronic record keeping 
functionality.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 2 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
REFERENCES 
This Attachment provides information applicable to DOE O 243.1C, Records Management 
Program, and contracts in which the CRD (Attachment 1 to DOE O 243.1C) is inserted. 
1. PUBLIC LAW (PL). 
a. PL 115-336, 21st Century Integrated Digital Experience Act. 
b. PL 107-347, E-Government Act of 2002. 
c. PL 106-229, Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act 
(ESIGN ACT). 
d. PL 113-291, Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act. 
e. PL 113-187, Presidential and Federal Records Act, as amended. 
f. PL 114-185, FOIA Improvement Act of 2016. 
g. PL 105-261, Sec. 3161, “Kyl-Lott Amendment of Strom Thurmond National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999.” 
h. PL 106-65, National Nuclear Security Administration Act, Title XXXII. 
i. PL 104-13, Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq. 
2. UNITED STATES CODE (U.S.C.). 
a. 5 U.S.C. § 552, Freedom of Information Act or FOIA (as amended). 
b. 5 U.S.C. § 552a, The Privacy Act 1974 (as amended). 
c. 42 U.S.C. § 7158, Naval Reactor and Military Application Programs. 
d. 44 U.S.C. Ch 36, Management and Promotion of Electronic Government 
Services. 
e. 44 U.S.C., Public Printing and Documents, Chapter 21, “National Archives and 
Records Administration”; Chapter 29, “Records Management by the Archivist of 
the United States and by the Administrator of General Services”:  Chapter 31, 
“Records Management by Federal Agencies”; Chapter 33, “Disposal of Records”; 
and Chapter 35, “Coordination of Federal Information Policy.” 
f. 44 U.S.C. § 2901, (2) “Definitions.” 
g. 44 U.S.C. § 3101, “Records management by agency heads; general duties.” 
h. 44 U.S.C. § 3301, “Definition of records.”

--- page 14 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 243.1D 
Page 2-2 08-05-2026 
 
i. 44 U.S.C. § 3303, “Lists and schedules of records to be submitted to Archivist by 
head of each Government agency.” 
j. 44 U.S.C. § 3501, “Purposes.” 
k. 50 U.S.C. § 2406, “Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors.” 
l. 50 U.S.C. § 2511, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program.” 
3. UNITED STATES CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR). 
a. 36 CFR, Chapter XII Subchapter B, “Records Management.” 
b. 41 CFR, § 102-193, Creation, Maintenance, and Use of Records (GSA role). 
c. 48 CFR, § 4.805, “Storage, handling, and contract files.” 
d. 48 CFR § 52.224-2, “Privacy Act.” 
e. 48 CFR § 952.204-2, “Security requirements.” 
f. 48 CFR § 952.204-70, “Classification/Declassification.” 
g. 48 CFR § 952.223-71, “Integration of environment, safety, and health into work 
planning and execution.” 
h. 48 CFR § 952.223-72, “Radiation protection and nuclear criticality.” 
i. 48 CFR § 952.223-75, “Preservation of individual occupational radiation 
exposure records.” 
j. 48 CFR § 970.0404, “Safeguarding classified information.” 
k. 48 CFR § 970.0407, “Contractor records retention.” 
l. 48 CFR § 970.5204-3, “Access to and ownership of records.” 
m. 48 CFR § 970.5232-3, “Accounts, records, and inspection.” 
4. EXECUTIVE ORDERS (EOs). 
a. EO 12333, “United States Intelligence Activities,” dated December 4, 1981. 
b. EO 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program,” dated February 1, 1982. 
c. EO 12656, “Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities,” 
dated March 16, 2012.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 2 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-3 
 
d. EO 13526, “Classified National Security Information,” dated December 29, 2009 
(32 CFR Parts 2001 and 2003). 
e. EO 13556, “Controlled Unclassified Information,” dated November 4, 2010 
(32 CFR Part 2002). 
5. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (DHS). 
a. Homeland Security, Federal Continuity Directive 1 (FCD 1), “Federal Executive 
Branch National Continuity Program and Requirements,” dated January 2017. 
6. NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION (NARA). 
a. AC 01.2020, “Memorandum to Federal Agency Contacts: Annual Move of 
Permanent Records.” 
b. NARA Bulletin 2008-06, Records Storage Facility Standards, dated August 25, 
2008. 
c. NARA Bulletin 2014-04, Revised Format Guidance for the Transfer of 
Permanent Electronic Records, dated January 31, 2014. 
d. NARA Bulletin 2015-04, Metadata Guidance for the Transfer of Permanent 
Electronic Records, dated September 15, 2015. 
e. NARA Bulletin 2017-01, Agency Records Management Training Requirements, 
dated November 29, 2016. 
f. NARA publication, Essential Records Guide. 
g. NARA publication, Guidance for Coordinating the Evaluation of Capital 
Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) Proposals for ERM Applications. 
h. NARA Universal Electronic Records Management (UERM) Requirements 
i. National Archives (NA) 14130, “Classified Records Transfer Checklist.” 
7. OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET (OMB). 
a. OMB Circular Number A-11, “Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the 
Budget,” dated July 2020. 
b. OMB, Delivering Government Solutions in the 21st Century: Reform Plan and 
Reorganization Recommendations 
c. OMB M-19-21, Transition to Electronic Records, dated June 28, 2019. 
d. Revision of OMB Circular No. A-130, “Managing Information as a Strategic 
Resource,” dated July 28, 2016.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 243.1D 
Page 2-4 08-05-2026 
 
8. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY (DOE). 
a. DOE P 450.4, Integrated Safety Management Policy, current version. 
b. DOE O 150.1, Continuity Programs, current version. 
c. DOE O 200.1, Information Technology Management, current version. 
d. DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version. 
e. DOE O 206.2, Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM), current 
version. 
f. DOE O 241.1, Scientific and Technical Information Management, current version. 
g. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version. 
h. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version. 
i. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version. 
j. DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Planning, current version. 
k. DOE O 471.1, Identification and Protection of Unclassified Controlled Nuclear 
Information, current version. 
l. DOE O 471.7, Controlled Unclassified Information, current version. 
m. DOE O 475.2, Identifying Classified Information, current version. 
n. DOE OCIO Records Management Processes, Procedure for Conducting a 
Records Inventory. 
o. DOE Reference Book for Contract Administrators (Chapter 9). 
p. ENG Form 6119, “Records Management Assessment Questionnaire/Checklist” 
(see DOE Powerpedia webpages). 
q. Records Management section of the DOE Chief Information Officer Website.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 3 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information applicable to DOE O 243.1D, Records Management 
Program, and contracts in which the CRD (Attachment 1 to DOE O 243.1D) is inserted. 
1. Capstone.  Capstone is the NARA-recommended approach to email records management 
that offers agencies the option of using a more simplified approach to managing email, 
eliminating the need to write a unique agency schedule.  Participating in Capstone allows 
an agency to use General Records Schedule (GRS) 6.1 (National Archives). 
2. Contractor-Owned Records.  Records not identified as federal records (such as company 
proprietary information, records unrelated to the work performed under a federal 
contract, and other similar records) that belong to the contractor.  Contractor/corporate-
owned records are defined in the contract and/or through the Access to an Ownership of 
Records clause (48 CFR § 970.5204.3).  Privacy Act Systems of Records (Federal 
Acquisition Regulation [FAR] 52-224-2) are NOT contractor-owned records. 
3. Departmental Element.  A first-tier organization at Headquarters and in the field.  
First-tier at Headquarters encompasses heads of the major Headquarters line programs 
(e.g., Program Secretarial Officers).  First-level field element refers to first-level 
organizations located outside the Washington Metropolitan area and encompasses 
Operations Offices, Site Offices, Field Offices, and Regional Offices.  Additional 
information is noted in the Correspondence Style Guide as directed by the Office of the 
Executive Secretariat. 
4. Department of Energy Records.  Federal records owned by the Department of Energy. 
5. Disposition.  Any activity with respect to: 
a. Disposal of temporary records that are no longer needed for the conduct of 
business by destruction or donation. 
b. Transfer of records to federal agency storage facilities or records centers. 
c. Transfer to the National Archives of the United States (see definition) records 
determined to have sufficient historical or other value to warrant 
continued preservation. 
6. Electronic Information System.  An information system that contains and provides access 
to computerized federal records and other information (36 CFR § 1236.2, Definitions). 
7. Electronic Record.  Information in an electronic state, determined to be a record, recorded 
in a form only a computer can process, and that satisfies the definition of a federal record 
under the Federal Records Act.  The term includes both the record content and the 
associated metadata the agency determines is required to meet agency business needs 
(36 CFR § 1220.18, What definitions apply to the regulations in Subchapter B?).

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 243.1D 
Page 3-2 08-05-2026 
 
8. Essential Records.  Records that an agency needs to meet operational responsibilities 
under national security emergencies or other emergency conditions (emergency operating 
records) or to protect the legal and financial rights of the government and those affected 
by government activities (legal and financial rights records).  Previously referred to as 
vital records (36 CFR § 1223.2b and the NARA Essential Records Guide). 
9. Federal Records.  Includes all recorded information, regardless of form or characteristics, 
made or received by a federal agency under federal law or in connection with the 
transaction of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by that 
agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, 
decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the United States Government or 
because of the informational value of data in them (44 U.S.C. § 3301, Definition of 
records, and 36 CFR § 1220.18). 
10. File Plan.  The basic structure in records management that groups together records with 
similar characteristics.  File plans can be a subset of the entire DOE/General Records 
Schedules record-schedule series that would be specific to an organization, project, 
program, or location within an agency.  A file plan may include the series, description, 
disposition instruction (retention) and authority, and other specific instructions that 
provide guidance for effective management of records. 
11. Freedom Of Information Act (FOIA).  A United States federal law that grants the public 
access to information possessed by government agencies.  Upon written request, U.S. 
government agencies are required to release information unless it falls under one of nine 
exemptions listed in the Act (5 U.S.C. § 552, Freedom of Information Act, as amended, 
Public Law 114-185, June 30, 2016). 
12. Inventory.  A systematic process used to discover, identify, and review an organization’s 
systems, records holdings, forms, and processes. 
13. Legal and Financial Rights Records.  Records critical to carrying out an organization’s 
essential legal and financial functions vital to the protection of the legal and financial 
rights of individuals who are directly affected by that organization’s activities.  These 
records include high-value records, the loss of which would significantly impair the 
execution of essential functions to the detriment of the legal or financial rights and 
entitlements of the organization and the affected individuals (NARA Essential 
Records Guide). 
14. Litigation Hold.  A hold issued by the General Counsel, who notifies appropriate DOE 
contacts when litigation involving DOE is ongoing or reasonably anticipated.  A hold 
suspends any and all disposition actions on records that relate to or are affected by 
pending or ongoing litigation.  Using a litigation hold ensures the records are available 
for use during court proceedings.  Programs should suspend disposition actions for 
records identified as responsive to the litigation hold notice. 
15. Metadata.  Preserved contextual information describing the history, tracking, and/or 
management of an electronic document (36 CFR § 1220.18).

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 243.1D Attachment 3 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-3 
 
16. National Archives and Records Administration.  An independent agency of the United 
States government charged with the preservation and documentation of government and 
historical records.  It is also tasked with increasing public access to those documents 
which make up the National Archives (National Archives). 
17. Nonrecord Materials.  Federally owned informational materials that do not meet the 
statutory definition of “records” (44 U.S.C. § 3301) or have been excluded from coverage 
by the definition.  Excluded are extra copies of documents kept only for reference, stocks 
of publications and processed documents, and library or museum materials intended 
solely for reference or exhibit (36 CFR § 1220.18). 
18. Permanent Record.  Any federal record that has been determined by NARA to have 
sufficient value to warrant its preservation in the National Archives of the United States, 
even while it remains in agency custody.  The term also includes all records accessioned 
by NARA into the National Archives of the United States (36 CFR § 1220.18). 
19. Privacy Act.  A United States federal law that governs the collection, maintenance, use, 
and dissemination of personally identifiable information about individuals that is 
maintained in systems of records by federal agencies (5 U.S.C. § 552a, “Privacy Act 
of 1974”). 
20. Records Life Cycle.  A concept used to describe how a record is handled throughout its 
lifespan.  The records life cycle has three main phases: creation, maintenance and use, 
and disposition. 
21. Records Management.  Planning, controlling, directing, organizing, training, promoting, 
and other managerial activities involved with respect to records creation, records 
maintenance and use, and records disposition in order to achieve adequate and proper 
documentation of the policies and transactions of the federal government and effective 
and economical management of Agency operations [44 U.S.C. § 2901(2)]. 
22. Records Schedule.  This identifies records as either temporary or permanent.  All records 
schedules must be approved by NARA.  A records schedule provides mandatory 
instructions for the disposition of the records (including the transfer of permanent records 
and disposal of temporary records) when they are no longer needed by the agency.  As 
part of the ongoing records life cycle, disposition should occur in the normal course of 
agency business.  Federal records must be scheduled (44 U.S.C. § 3303, Lists and 
schedules of records to be submitted to the Archivist by head of each Government 
agency) either by an agency schedule or a GRS. 
23. Series.  File units or documents arranged according to a filing or classification system or 
kept together because they relate to a particular subject or function, result from the same 
activity, document a specific kind of transaction, take a particular physical form, or have 
some other relationship arising out of their creation, receipt, or use, such as restrictions 
on access and use.  Also called a records series (36 CFR § 1220.18).

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 243.1D 
Page 3-4 08-05-2026 
 
24. Temporary Records.  Federal records NARA approves for either immediate disposal or 
for disposal after a specified time or event (36 CFR § 1220.18). 
25. Unscheduled Records.  Federal records, the final disposition of which has not been 
approved by NARA on an SF 115, Request for Records Disposition Authority.
