--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
Washington, D.C. 
Approved: 4-25-2011
Chg 1 (MinChg): 1-17-2017 
SUBJECT: INTEGRATED SAFETY MANAGEMENT 
1. PURPOSE. To ensure that the Department of Energy (DOE), including the National
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), systematically integrates safety into
management and work practices at all levels, so that missions are accomplished
efficiently while protecting the workers, the public, and the environment. Throughout this
Order, “safety” is used synonymousl y with environment, safety, and health (ES&H).
2. CANCELLATION. This Order supersedes DOE Order O 450.2, dated 4-25-11.
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor Requirements
Documents (CRD) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect
throughout the term of the contract unless, and until, the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or
substitute a new set of requirements.
3. APPLICABILITY.
a. Departmental Applicability. Except for the equivalencies and exemptions in
paragraph 3.c., this Order applies to all Departmental Elements.
The Administrator of NNSA will assure that NNSA employees comply with their
responsibilities under this Order. Nothing in this Order will be construed to
interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of
Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish Administration-specific policies unless 
disapproved by the Secretary.
b. DOE Contractors. This Order is not applicable to DOE contractors. Contractor
requirements for integrated safety management (ISM) are implemented via the
Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) clause at 48 C.F.R.
970.5223-1, Integration of Environment, Safety, and Health into Work Planning
and Execution, where prescribed by the DEAR. See 48 C.F.R. 923.7003, 952.223-
71, and 970.2303-3.
c. Equivalencies /Exemptions.
(1) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities
assigned by Executive Order 12344, codified at 50 U.S.C., sections 2406
and 2511, and to ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval
Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval
Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements and
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director's
cognizance, as deemed appropriate by the Director.
DOE O 450.2

--- page 2 ---
2   DOE O 450.2 
4-25-2011
(
2) Exemption. C onsistent with Secretarial Delegation Order Number 00-
033.00B to the Administrator and Chief Executive Office of Bonneville
Power Administration (BPA), this Order does not apply to BPA.
4. REQUIREMENTS.
a. DOE line management1 organizations must document their approach for ensuring
that both their DOE offices and their contractors establish ISM systems, including
the implementing mechanisms, processes, and methods to be used in an ISM
System Description Document. The ISM System Description Document must be
consistent with the hazards and complexity of the facilities and work performed.
Furthermore, this document must clearly describe how ISM Guiding Principles
and Core Functions (see DOE P 450.4) have been applied and how relevant safety
goals and objectives are established, documented, and implemented.
b. DOE line managers must determine the adequacy for approval and frequency of
updates of both their DOE offices’ and their contractors’ ISM System Description
Documents.
c. DOE line managers must determine the need for, and frequency of, DOE ISM
Declarations (i.e., the status and effectiveness of ISM system implementation,
including planning and execution of work) for facilities and activities based on 
hazards, risks, and contractor performance history and document their decisions
concerning high consequence activities, such as high-hazard nuclear operations.
d. DOE line managers responsible for program and site offices’ overall ISM system
implementation must designate a representative to serve on the ISM Champions
Council.
e. ISM Champions Council, functioning in accordance with its charter,2 must
support line management in developing and sustaining vital, mature ISM systems
throughout the Department so that work is reliably accomplished in a safe
manner.
f. DOE Safety Culture Improvement Panel, functioning in accordance with its
charter3, must provide sustained leadership, consistent implementation, and an 
enterprise-wide cross-organizational focus to continuous safety culture
improvement.
g. To ensure adequate safety in contractor management of DOE facilities while
meeting mission goals, DOE line management must ensure that appropriate
requirements are incorporated into contracts, oversee compliance, assess
1 DOE line management refers to the unbroken chain of responsibility that extends from the Secretary of Energy to 
the Deputy Secretary, to the Secretarial Officers who set program policy and plans and develop assigned programs, 
and to the program and Field Element Managers who are responsible for execution of these programs. 
2 The ISM Champions Council Charter is available on the DOE ISM Champions Web site. 
3 The Safety Culture Improvement Panel charter is available on the DOE Safety Culture Improvement Panel web 
site.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 450.2 3 
4-25-11
contractor performance against established performance measures, analyze 
relevant trends, and obtain relevant operational information for use as feedback 
to improve safety. 
h. Line management and support organizations, with safety management
responsibility, must develop, issue, and maintain, separately or as part of the
ISM System Description Document, an organizational Functions,
Responsibilities, and Authorities (FRA) document that:
(1) D escribes the organization and management structure;
(2) Identifies the safety management functions applicable to the
organization;
(3) Identifies the organization’s functions and authorities that have been
transferred to or from another organization or derived from a DOE safety
directive or applicable governmental agency regulation;
(4) Identifies who within the organization has the responsibility and
authority to perform those functions;
(5) Lists the delegated authorities;
(6) Explains the general process for control and revision of the FRA
document and the process used for delegations of authority;
(7) Is readily accessible to all organizational employees;
(8) Is approved by the head of the DOE organization to which the FRA
document applies; and
(9) Is reviewed annually and updated, if needed, to reflect changes to the
delegations of authority and changes in responsibilities and
authorizations as specified in DOE safety directives, applicable
governmental agency regulations, and Secretarial memoranda.
i. FRA documents for program offices that direct operations at locations where
more than one DOE program office have work conducted must contain
applicable memoranda of understanding (MOU) that define the allocation of
safety management functions and responsibilities among the program offices.
j. Following the process described in Appendix A, each Department’s line
management organization must develop, issue, and maintain a documented
process for delegation of authorities to perform safety management functions
consistent with the hazards and complexity of the work. DOE's safety
management responsibilities for ensuring adequate protection and safe
operations must be met by DOE line management and cannot be delegated to
contractors.

--- page 4 ---
4   DOE O 450.2 
4-25-2011
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.
a. Secretary/Deputy Secretary.
(1) Establish and communicate ES&H expectations.
(2) Ensure effective operation of the ISM Champions Council and designate
the DOE ISM Co-Champions to lead the Council.
(3) Approve changes to the Charter of the ISM Champions Council.
b. Secretarial Officers.
(1) Develop and maintain an ISM System Description Document and an
organizational FRA for their Headquarters office. The System Description
and FRA can be provided in separate documents or in  the same document.
(2) Review and (except for NNSA) approve Field Elements’ ISM System
Descriptions. Monitor the status of Field Element and Field Element
contractors’ ISM systems; monitor Field Elements’ establishment and
implementation of safety goals and objectives.
(3) Determine the need for, and frequency of, ISM Declarations for Field
Element and contractor facilities and activities based on hazards, risk, and
performance history with input from Field Elements.
(4) Define the delegations of authorities and specify the responsibilities that
are assigned to specific offices within their organizations in an FRA
document.
(5) Establish minimum expectations in terms of individual and organizational
capabilities for assigned safety responsibilities or delegated safety
authorities.
(6) Establish secretarial office level MOUs, as appropriate, that define the
agreed-upon procedures governing operations at locations where multiple
program offices conduct work.
c. Heads of DOE Field Elements.
(1) Develop and maintain an ISM System Description Document and an
organizational FRA for their Field Element separately or as part of the
same document. For NNSA sites, approve and submit the ISM System
Description to the Secretarial Officer.
(2) Monitor the status of ISM systems for their contractors’ facilities and
activities and provide feedback to their contractors to support continuous
improvement.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 450.2 5 
4-25-11
(3) Ensure the establishment of the annual Field Element safety goals and
objectives and contractor safety performance objectives, measures, and
commitments.
(4) Support the Secretarial Office in determining the need for, and
frequency of, Field Element and Field Element contractors’ ISM
Declarations.
(5) Determine whether and when to conduct ISM verifications of contractor
ISM systems.
(6) Implement the Field Element management systems to ensure DOE
safety requirements and expectations are achieved.
(7) Establish Field Element level MOUs, as appropriate, that define
implementing methodologies for the procedures agreed-upon by the
Secretarial Officers for governing operations at a location where
multiple program offices conduct work. Incorporate the MOUs into
organizational FRA documents, as appropriate.
d. Associate Undersecretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security
(EHSS).
(1) Serves as the senior manager of the Office of Primary Interest for DOE
safety directives in support of line management.
(2) Develops and maintain s a guidance document for implementation of
ISM systems by DOE line management and DOE contractors.
(3) Defines the delegation of authorities and specifies the responsibilities
that are assigned to specific HSS offices in an FRA document.
e. ISM Champions Council.
(1) Assists DOE line management in developing, implementing, and
maintaining effective ISM systems.
(2) Serves as the primary forum for assisting DOE line managers in the
development of Department-wide strategies for improving safety
culture.
(3) Reports on the acti vities of the ISM Champions Council to the Deputy
Secretary, including initiatives to improve safety culture, with
concurrence by the Associate Undersecretary for EHSS.
(4) Informs the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary on the status of overall
ISM implementation within the Department, as necessary .

--- page 6 ---
6   DOE O 450.2 
4-25-2011
f. Safety Culture Improvement Panel.
(1) Strengthens the implementation of safety culture and safety conscious
work environment throughout DOE.
(2) Shares and, as necessary, develops improvement and sustainment tools for
positive safety culture.
(3) Provides high-level, line management attention to evaluating safety
culture issues and strengths.
(4) Provides a forum for evaluating DOE safety culture status, progress, and
challenges, and communicates the results to the workforce.
(5) Works to continuously improve DOE safety culture with representatives
from across the complex.
(6) Stays current in advances in organizational safety culture and how best
practices can be applied to DOE.
(7) Identifies opportunities to incorporate safety culture and the
concepts/practices of a safety conscious work environment into leadership
and employee training, in coordination with DOE's National Training
Center, the Federal Technical Capability Panel, and DOE's Chief Learning
Officer.
6. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Office of Health
and Safety at (301) 903-7385.
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
EL
IZABETH SHERWOOD-RANDALL 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 450.2 Appendix A 
4-25-2011 A-1
Appendix A 
Delegations of Authority to Perform Safety Management Functions 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. When not prohibited by law or by the Secretary, DOE
officials may delegate authority to perform their assigned safety management
functions.
a. Delegations of authority for safety functions, other than those related to nuclear
facilities as described below, may be made to either a position or a person.
b. Delegating officials remain fully accountable for the outcome of any actions
taken that are associated with the delegated function(s) during the time that the
delegation of authority is in effect.
c. Delegating officials create and maintain documentation of such delegations that
include descriptions of the circumstances under which the delegated authorities
take effect, any limitations to the authorities delegated, and the time period for
which the delegation is valid.
d. A copy of the delegation of authority must be provided to the delegate.
e. Unless otherwise stated, delegations of authority must remain in effect until
they are modified, rescinded, or they expire.
f. Delegating officials may modify or rescind in writing the delegation at any
time.
g. A copy of the rescission or modification must be provided to the delegate who
previously had the delegated authority so that the delegate is aware of the
rescission and can document the revised delegation in the appropriate FRA
document.
h. Delegation of program office authority to individuals in Field Element offices
must not preclude the program offices from issuing requirements, expectations,
and guidance affecting that authority or from participating in associated
interactions with the operating or management contractor.
i. Delegations of authority must be reviewed periodically (at least every 2 years).
j. If the authority to perform a function listed in a DOE office’s FRA document is
delegated to another office, the office receiving the delegation must be allowed
to review and comment on that aspect of the associated FRA document and
have its comments satisfactorily resolved. Both organizations must update their
FRA documents to reflect the delegation
2. NUCLEAR FACILITY SAFETY DELEGATION REQUIREMENTS. Delegation of
nuclear safety authorities and self-assessment of this delegation process must comply
with the process criteria and attributes specified below.

--- page 8 ---
Appendix A DOE O 450.2 
A-2  4-25-2011
a. Process Criteria.
(1) Delegations must only be made to individuals who possess the necessary
qualifications, experience, and expertise.
(a) Approval of documented safety analyses, technical safety
requirements, and unreviewed safety question procedures required
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. part 830, subpart B, Safety Basis Requirements,
must not be further delegated below the most senior-level program 
officer or deputy at a Field Element office unless concurrence is
obtained from the applicable Central Technical Authority (CTA).
(b) Minimum expectations in terms of individual requirements for the
most senior-level program officer at a Field Element office and his or
her deputy must include (1) Senior Technical Safety Manager
qualifications consistent with DOE Order 426.1 Chg 1, Federal
Technical Capability, and (2) successful completion of the 1-week
Nuclear Executive Leadership Training course.
(c) The senior-level program officers at Headquarters that are expected
to fulfill the responsibilities listed in (a) above are expected to have
the same qualification as listed in (b) above.
(2) Delegations must only be made where the candidate’s organization
possesses, or has access to, sufficient staff (for example, a Service Center)
with the necessary qualifications, experience, and expertise to support the
candidate for the authorities being delegated.
(3) Delegation must only be made where the candidate’s organization has the
proper framework of processes and procedures, as well as adequate resources
and funding, to implement the delegated authorities.
(4) In those rare cases in which delegation must be made prior to the candidate
fully satisfying the established criteria above, compensatory measures must
be established.
(5) There are field elements supporting more than one program office at a single
site; therefore, to be consistent with line management responsibility for
safety, the Assistant Managers for Environmental Management or equivalent
position at Field Elements may be delegated safety authorities. These
delegations must be made with the approval of the lead program field
element manager.
b. Process Attributes for Nuclear Safety Delegations.
(1) Delegating officials must establish a documented process or procedure to
ensure that delegations are made carefully and accurately, consistent with
the process criteria and attributes defined in this Appendix.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 450.2 Appendix A 
4-25-2011 A-3
(2) Delegating officials must establish their minimum expectations in terms of
individual and organizational capabilities and capacities for the various
delegations.
(3) Delegating officials must document their review of these criteria for every
delegation made.
(4) Delegations must only be made to individuals, not to positions. The
delegations must clearly identify to the extent to which further delegations
are allowed, consistent with this criterion.
(5) Delegation processes should consider the judgment of at least two senior
managers.
(6) Delegation processes must also address delegations of authority to
subordinate Headquarters personnel.
(7) Compensatory measures related to this process must receive concurrence 
from the applicable CTA prior to delegation of authority.
(8) Periodic reviews must be documented with the same criteria and rigor as
the original delegations. Using the results of the delegation review, the
reviewing officials must recommend to the applicable delegating officials
whether to confirm, revise, or rescind the delegations or to institute
compensatory measures or corrective actions as needed.
(9) The CTA support staff must annually review the delegation process to
evaluate whether it is adequate and functioning properly and to identify
any concerns to the CTA, who will notify the Under Secretary and the
Secretarial Office (SO) and recommend action as appropriate.
c. Review of Delegations. An Under Secretary or SO with safety responsibilities
related to nuclear facilities must periodically review (at intervals no greater than 2
years) assigned safety responsibilities and delegated safety authorities and verify
that the necessary capability and capacity to perform the responsibilities and
authorities still exist. Safety responsibilities are documented in the FRA
documents developed and approved by the Under Secretaries and SOs. Unless
otherwise prohibited, the authority to take the necessary actions to fulfill the
safety functions documented in any Under Secretary’s and SOs FRA documents
may be delegated to either subordinate Field or Headquarters personnel.
(1) Self-Assessments.
(a) SOs must establish a documented process or procedure to ensure
that self-assessments are conducted consistent with the criteria
defined in this Appendix.

--- page 10 ---
Appendix A DOE O 450.2 
A-4 4-25-2011
(b) A documented comprehensive self-assessment must be performed
periodically (at intervals no greater than 2 years) based on the
criteria presented in this Appendix.
(c) If the necessary capability or capacity to carry out assigned safety
responsibilities or delegated safety authorities is found lacking,
compensatory measures, corrective actions, or rescissions must be
approved by the Under Secretary or SO and instituted as necessary.
(d) Self-assessments must be performed by qualified, experienced
personnel.
(e) The CTA support staff must independently review the self-
assessments for associated offices and identify any concerns to the
CTA, who will notify the Under Secretary and SO and recommend
actions as appropriate.
(2) Assessment Criteria. The following criteria must be used in assessing
individual and organizational capabilities or capacities to execute assigned
safety responsibilities or delegated safety authorities:
(a) Individuals possess the necessary qualifications, experience, and
expertise to carry out their responsibilities.
(b) Organizations have the proper framework of processes and
procedures to implement the assigned responsibilities.
(c) Organizations have adequate resources, including sufficient staff
and funding to carry out the assigned responsibilities.
(d) All assigned safety responsibilities or delegated safety authorities
have been identified.
(e) Each assigned safety responsibility or delegated safety authority
has been reviewed and documented.
