--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov National Nuclear Security Administration 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE SAFETY 
1. PURPOSE.  This Order establishes enforceable requirements to implement Nuclear 
Explosive Safety (NES) elements of United State (U.S.) Department of Energy 
(DOE) Order (O) 452.1, Nuclear Explosive and Weapon Surety Program, for Nuclear 
Explosive Operations (NEOs) and Nuclear Explosive-Like Assemblies (NELAs).  NEOs 
shall be designed, evaluated, authorized, and conducted to ensure nuclear explosive 
safety under all authorized conditions. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 452.2F, Nuclear Explosive Safety, dated 
July 27, 2020.  Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect 
any contractual obligation to comply with the directive. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Elements and DOE Contractors. 
(1) This Order applies to National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) 
and DOE contractors performing, managing, overseeing, or supporting 
NEOs, NELAs, or associated activities. 
(2) The NNSA Administrator will ensure that NNSA employees comply with 
their respective responsibilities under this Directive.  Nothing in this Order 
will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority 
under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65, National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, to establish Administration-
specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
(3) NEOs require special consideration because of the extreme consequences 
of an accident or unauthorized act.  The NES Program outlined in this 
Order and in Attachments 1–4 supports the requirement that NEOs must 
be designed and conducted in a manner that meets the NES Standards of 
DOE O 452.1, current version.  Except for the exclusions in paragraph 3.b. 
(below), contractors shall comply with the requirements in this Order and 
guidance in DOE O 452.1F, paragraphs 4.a–4.c and Attachment 1, 
Contractor Requirements Document (CRD). 
DOE O 452.2G

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
b. DOE Contractors.  The requirements of this Order shall be incorporated into 
applicable contracts, including Management and Operating (M&O) contracts.  
The contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD, if 
applicable.  Contractors shall comply with the requirements of applicable federal, 
state, and local laws and regulations in carrying out the requirements of this Order 
unless relief has been granted in writing.  Omission of any applicable law or 
regulation from the Order does not affect the obligation of the contractor to 
comply with such law or regulation.  Contractors must comply with the 
requirements of this Order, except to the extent modified by the equivalencies or 
exemptions identified herein or issued to the contractor in writing by DOE 
utilizing the process outlined in DOE O 251.1E, Departmental Directives 
Program, including as amended or updated. 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 452.2G.  Exemptions must be requested 
when release is sought from a requirement in this Directive or successor 
directives.  The exemption process is outlined in DOE O 251.1, current version.  
The approval authority is the Deputy Administrator for Defense Programs with 
concurrence from the Central Technical Authority. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program,” 
codified at 50 U.S.C. §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, 
and 2511, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, and to ensure consistency 
throughout the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the 
Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and 
oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for 
activities under the Director's cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  This Order does not apply to emergencies requiring Accident 
Response Group action.  DOE O 151.1, Comprehensive Emergency 
Management System, current version, addresses emergencies involving 
nuclear explosives (NEs).  The Deputy Administrator for Defense 
Programs is authorized to ensure transition from emergency management 
directives to this Order once the emergency is terminated. 
(3) Exemption.  Subcritical experiments performed at the Nevada National 
Security Site and conducted under the authority of the Nevada Field 
Office are exempt from this Order based on their inherently subcritical 
design features, as defined by Nevada Field Office (NFO) O 450.X5, 
Subcritical Experiment Program.  NFO O 450.X5, or successor document, 
addresses performing, managing, overseeing, and directly supporting 
subcritical experiments and associated activities.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 452.2 3 
08-05-2026 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Nuclear Explosive Safety Program.  NEOs require special consideration because 
of the extreme consequences of an accident or unauthorized act.  When the 
defined safety theme of the nuclear explosive (NE) is not intact, then facility 
and/or process controls are necessary to ensure NES.  If the safety theme of the 
NE is intact, NES evaluations may still be necessary to evaluate the adequacy and 
efficacy placed upon the process.  The NES Program outlined in this section 
supports the requirement that NEOs must be designed and conducted in a manner 
that meets the NES Standards of DOE O 452.1, current version.  It includes the 
following: Nuclear Explosive Safety Rules (NESRs), general and supplemental; 
formal NES evaluations; fundamental NEO process requirements (procedures, 
facilities, equipment, and people); requirements for onsite and offsite 
transportation (mobile NEOs); sustaining requirements (positive verification, 
change control, and configuration management); requirements for NELAs; and 
permanent marking of NEs and NELAs. 
(1) General NESRs.  The general NESRs set forth in this paragraph are 
mandatory for all NEOs. 
(a) Nuclear Explosive Safety Evaluation.  NEOs must not be 
performed until an NES evaluation has been completed and 
findings indicating that an NES standard has not been met have 
been closed. 
(b) Nuclear Explosive Operating Procedures.  NEOs must be 
performed in accordance with approved written procedures. 
(c) One-Point Safety. 
1 Tooling and equipment must be evaluated to ensure that 
their intended use on an NE certified to be one-point safe 
does not cause an NE or equipment configuration that is not 
one-point safe. 
2 If it is determined that an NE no longer meets the one-point 
safety criteria, all production plant operations (including 
assembly, disassembly, and onsite transportation) and 
offsite transportation with that NE must be discontinued in 
a safe manner.  Before operations with that nuclear 
explosive can be resumed, a path forward must be 
developed, an NES evaluation must be completed, and 
findings indicating an NES standard has not been met must 
be closed.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
(d) Nuclear Explosive Areas (NEAs). 
1 Energy sources in NEAs must be identified and 
documented.  Unauthorized energy sources must not be 
available during NEOs. 
2 Ignition sources in NEAs must be identified and either 
(1) eliminated or (2) minimized and controlled to prevent 
adverse interaction with combustible or flammable 
materials and the nuclear explosive. 
3 Combustible and flammable materials in NEAs must be 
identified and either (1) eliminated or (2) minimized and 
controlled to prevent adverse interaction with the 
nuclear explosive. 
(e) Electrical Testing.  Unless directed by a design agency (DA) 
special instruction engineering release (SIER) that was reviewed 
for NES impact by certified DA NES personnel, nuclear explosives 
must not be subjected to: 
1 Redundant electrical tests, or 
2 Electrical troubleshooting (i.e., to confirm the existence of 
a fault, or aid in fault isolation) except with authorized test 
equipment and procedures that have been subjected to an 
NES evaluation and found to be acceptable for the 
specific application. 
Note:  Repeat electrical tests performed in conformance 
with approved NE operating procedures and separated by 
other actions that might alter test results are not 
considered redundant. 
(f) Safe and Stable. 
1 If it is determined that an NE is no longer in a condition 
covered by an approved written procedure, all operations 
with that NE and in the associated facility must be 
discontinued in a safe manner, resulting in a safe and stable 
NE configuration. 
2 Before operations on the affected unit can be resumed, a 
DA SIER must be developed, and the NEO change control 
process must be completed in accordance with change 
control requirements in paragraph 4.a.(13). 
a A DA NES-certified personnel must specifically 
review the SIER for impact on NES.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 452.2 5 
08-05-2026 
b Transportation operations, if applicable, must be 
specifically addressed in the SIER. 
3 A decision to resume other activities in the facility must 
include consideration of possible interactions with that unit. 
4 If achieving a safe and stable nuclear configuration was due 
to a process, tooling, or facility issue, and not the result of a 
condition with the NE, and if the NE remains in an 
as-expected configuration, then no SIER is required for 
resumption of operations. 
(2) Nuclear Explosive Safety Evaluations.  NES evaluations are required 
before an NEO is authorized periodically for ongoing NEOs and when 
proposed changes or emerging information affect an approved NEO.  NES 
evaluations must be performed in accordance with NNSA Supplemental 
Directive (SD) 452.2, Nuclear Explosive Safety Evaluation Processes, 
current version. 
(3) Human Factors. 
(a) Elements of NEOs, such as new procedures, processes, facilities or 
facility layouts, new tooling and equipment, must incorporate 
human factors principles during the NEO design and development 
phase and be maintained throughout the life cycle of the NEO.  
Existing NEOs should strive to meet human factors principles to 
the extent reasonably achievable. 
(b) Organizations developing NEOs must consider the application of 
established research in human factors and ergonomics, including 
human-system interface design, human cognition and perception, 
stress and workload, anthropometry and workspace design, 
environmental factors, training, and human error. 
(4) Procedures.  Written procedures (paper or electronic) that control the 
interactions between the NE, the operating facility, equipment, and 
personnel must meet the following requirements: 
(a) Design agencies must review and concur with original issues of 
procedures for NEOs and NEO-associated activities. 
(b) All written procedures for NEOs must place proper emphasis on 
preventing accidents and detecting abnormal conditions by 
accomplishing the following: 
1 Comply with design specifications and 
technical requirements. 
2 Clearly state cautions and warnings.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
3 Identify appropriate points to interrupt work safely. 
4 Include generic contingency procedures that are directed 
toward quickly achieving a safe and stable NE 
configuration to be applied in response to all unexpected 
situations not covered by other written procedures. 
(5) Two-Person Concept.  Organizations responsible for NEOs and 
NEO-associated activities and facilities (to include NELA verifications as 
specified in Attachment 3 of this Order) must establish and implement the 
two-person concept as specified in Attachment 1 of this Order. 
(6) Facilities.  Facilities used for NEOs with NEs that do not have an intact 
defined safety theme must be characterized, evaluated, and specifically 
approved for that use, based (in part) on an independent NES evaluation in 
accordance with NNSA SD 452.2, current version. 
During NES evaluations of facilities, safety structures, systems, and 
components (SSCs) can be considered to credibly control natural 
phenomenon hazards (NPH) if they meet the appropriate NPH design 
categories found in DOE-Standard (STD)-1020, Natural Phenomena 
Hazards Analysis and Design Criteria for DOE Facilities (Invoked), 
current version, as invoked by DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current 
version.  DOE mobile conveyances used for transportation of NEs do not 
need to meet DOE-STD-1020. 
(7) Equipment.  Organizations responsible for NEOs and NEO-associated 
activities and facilities must verify that all equipment used in NEAs 
(including tooling, testers, and other mechanical and electrical equipment) 
meet the following requirements. 
(a) Design specifications and technical requirements must 
be documented. 
(b) Designs must ensure NEs will remain in a safe condition should a 
system or component of the tool or equipment fail. 
(c) Each item used in an NEO must be specifically approved for that 
operation.  Unapproved, moveable items must be excluded from 
the NEA.  Positive measures must be used to prevent the use of 
facility equipment that is not approved for the NEO, but is 
impracticable to remove. 
(d) Equipment intended to apply energy to an NE must incorporate 
features that limit application of energy to a known, safe level.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 452.2 7 
08-05-2026 
(e) Energy sources associated with equipment used in NEAs must be 
identified, analyzed, characterized, and documented.  Engineered 
controls relied upon to protect NEs from these energy sources must 
be validated through analysis and testing. 
(f) Energetic equipment intended for use in NEAs by emergency 
responders (e.g., fire department personnel, security force, and 
radiological protection) must be evaluated and characterized with 
respect to potential hazards.  Training of expected responders and 
NEA workers must address emergency situations to help ensure 
safety of responders and associated equipment. 
(g) Attachment 3 of this Order specifies additional requirements for 
electrical equipment used in NEAs. 
(8) Maintenance of Facilities, Tooling, and Other Equipment.  Organizations 
responsible for NEOs and NEO-associated activities and facilities must 
review maintenance programs and activities for impact on NES.  
Maintenance implementation plans must include a detailed description of 
maintenance activity control and approval, including limitations on 
equipment and materials that are allowed in NEAs. 
(9) Personnel.  Each organization responsible for or involved in NEOs and 
NEO-associated activities must implement training, qualification, and 
certification programs for personnel that manage, oversee, perform, or 
directly support these operations and activities. 
In addition to the applicable requirements in 10 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) § 712, Human Reliability Program, and DOE O 426.2, 
Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification 
Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities, current version, annual training 
will be conducted for personnel assigned to nuclear explosive duty that 
includes the following NES-specific topics: 
(a) Responsibilities associated with custody of NEs. 
(b) Use of general NESRs and immediate action procedures. 
(c) Site-, facility-, program-, and operation-specific safety 
requirements. 
(d) The purpose, objective, and responsibilities of the two-person 
concept for operations. 
(e) Explosive safety appropriate for assigned responsibilities.

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
For site-, facility-, program-, and operation-specific safety requirements, 
the annual training requirements under paragraph 4.a.(10)(c) above may 
be met with training provided during an initial certification or qualification 
program and through a continued recertification or requalification process, 
provided that the process requires no less than an annual review or 
demonstration of knowledge of the safety requirements. 
(10) Transportation of Nuclear Explosives.  Nuclear explosive transportation is 
a mobile NEO and involves a mobile NEA.  Because the application of 
controls to NE transportation is significantly different from applying 
controls to a fixed facility, requirements specified for NEOs and NEAs 
elsewhere in this Directive apply, except as noted below in (b). 
(a) Organizations responsible for NEOs and NEO-associated activities 
and facilities must establish requirements and procedures to ensure 
safe onsite transportation of nuclear explosives. 
(b) Transportation operations and shipping configurations of NEs with 
intact defined safety themes certified to Standard Technical 
Specifications environments determined to bound the 
transportation environments, including all items in the conveyance, 
are not subject to the NES evaluation requirements of 
Paragraphs 4.a.(1)(a) and 4.a.(2).  An NES evaluation may still be 
necessary to evaluate the adequacy and efficacy of controls placed 
upon the process. 
1 Nuclear explosives without an intact defined safety theme 
must be transported in conveyances specifically reviewed 
through the NES evaluation process. 
2 Criteria must be established for protecting NEs during 
transportation.  The criteria and restraint designs for 
specific nuclear explosive configurations must be reviewed 
through the NES evaluation process. 
(11) Mixed Venues.  NEs must not be transported or staged with any other 
assembly that could be mistaken for an NE. 
If operational constraints require nuclear explosives and NELAs to be 
collocated, the operations must comply with the NELA standards in 
paragraph 4.a.(15) of this Directive and must be evaluated by a Nuclear 
Explosive Safety Study Group (NESSG).  The operational justification for 
collocation of the nuclear explosives and NELAs will be provided to the 
NESSG during the evaluation.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 452.2 9 
08-05-2026 
(12) Positive Verification. 
(a) Organizations responsible for NEOs and NEO-associated activities 
and facilities must develop and implement a verification process to 
ensure use of qualified personnel who are fit for duty, 
operationally ready facilities, correct equipment that is current in 
any required calibration and preventive maintenance, and current 
approved procedures. 
(b) The configuration and condition of a nuclear explosive and its 
safety features must be determined as early as practicable during 
any planned NEO.  For operations occurring prior to this 
determination, or in the event a determination cannot be made, 
incompatibility with or isolation from external energy that may 
lead to credible NES consequences must be demonstrated. 
(13) Change Control.  Organizations responsible for NEOs and NEO-
associated activities and facilities must establish and implement an NES 
change evaluation process in accordance with NNSA SD 452.2, current 
version.  This NES evaluation is separate and independent from the 
unreviewed safety question process required by 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear 
Safety Management, and must be completed before approval and 
implementation of the change. 
All proposed changes to authorized NEOs, including the following, are 
subject to the NEO change control process. 
(a) Proposals that may have direct NES implications (e.g., procedural, 
equipment, or facility changes to an approved NEO). 
(b) Proposals that may have indirect NES implications (i.e., changes or 
new activities that could impact the foundation established by 
previous NES master studies). 
(c) Changes in knowledge affecting an approved NEO (i.e., new 
understanding of a potential threat to NES or new data regarding 
the response of a nuclear explosive to a stimulus). 
(14) Configuration Management. 
(a) Organizations responsible for NEOs and NEO-associated activities 
and facilities must develop and implement a configuration 
management program incorporating elements applicable to NEOs 
and NEO-associated activities and facilities. 
(b) To ensure consistency with design requirements and the safety 
basis, the configuration management program must include the 
following:

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
1 The physical configuration of a nuclear explosive and its 
components; the tooling, equipment, and procedures used 
in NEOs and NEO-associated activities; and the interface 
with the facilities in which these operations and activities 
are conducted; 
2 Unique identification of special tooling and equipment used 
in NEOs; 
3 Positive identification of tooling and equipment requiring 
calibration or testing within a calibration or testing control 
program; and 
4 Incorporation of approved changes into all affected 
documents (including design documents, drawings, 
procedures, and safety basis documents) and programs 
(including maintenance and training). 
(15) Nuclear Explosive-Like Assemblies. 
(a) Nuclear Explosive-Like Assembly Standards.  All NELA 
operations must meet the following qualitative NELA standards. 
1 There must be positive measures to prevent inadvertent or 
unauthorized assembly of a nuclear explosive in place of an 
NELA configuration. 
2 There must be positive measures to prevent inadvertent or 
unauthorized transfer of a nuclear explosive in place of an 
NELA configuration. 
In the context of these NELA standards, the term prevent is 
applied as described for the Nuclear Explosive Surety 
Standards in DOE O 452.1, current version. 
(b) Nuclear Explosive-Like Assembly Requirements.  Attachment 4 
provides the criteria that must be used to make NELA 
determinations.  If an NELA has been determined to exist, this 
determination must be documented and retained by the 
determining authority.  Organizations with or without an NEO 
mission that are responsible for NELA operations must implement 
the NELA requirements in Attachment 3 of this Directive. 
(16) Marking Instructions.  Nuclear explosives and NELAs must be marked to 
distinguish configurations capable of a nuclear explosive detonation from 
those that are not.  Organizations responsible for NEOs or NELA 
operations must implement the marking requirements in Attachment 4 of 
this Directive.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 452.2 11 
08-05-2026 
b. Independent Oversight.  The Associate Administrator for Safety, Infrastructure 
and Operations executes independent oversight through the Office of the Chief of 
Defense Nuclear Safety of this Directive’s implementation and associated NNSA 
SDs by NNSA personnel.  This oversight may be carried out through observation 
of NNSA NES evaluations, independent assessments, shadowing of field element 
assessments, or other appropriate mechanisms.  On an annual basis, the Office of 
the Associate Administrator for Safety, Infrastructure and Operations will 
summarize its oversight activities, along with any recommendations for changes 
in the NES Program in a report to the NNSA Deputy Administrator for Defense 
Programs, the Assistant Deputy Administrator for Stockpile Management, and the 
Assistant Deputy Administrator for Secure Transportation.  The Assistant Deputy 
Administrator for Stockpile Management and/or Assistant Deputy Administrator 
for Secure Transportation will respond within 90 days to the recommendations 
with a proposed corrective action plan, or justification for no action. 
c. Records.  Records (documentation) must be maintained in accordance with 
National Archives and Records Administration-approved DOE or site-specific 
records retention and disposition schedules in accordance with DOE O 243.1, 
Records Management Program, current version. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Deputy Administrator for Defense Programs. 
(1) Ensure implementation of NES Programs. 
(2) Approve exemptions to this Order. 
b. Assistant Deputy Administrator for Stockpile Management.  Respond within 
90 days to Office of Environment, Safety, and Health independent oversight 
recommendations with a proposed corrective action plan, or justification for 
no action. 
c. Assistant Deputy Administrator for Secure Transportation.  Support NA-12 by 
providing a proposed corrective action plan or justification for no action for 
oversight recommendations directed toward an NA-15 area of responsibility. 
d. NNSA Field Element Managers Responsible for NES Program Implementation. 
(1) Provide oversight of NNSA M&O contractors. 
(2) Provide direction to the Contracting Officers to ensure that 
Attachments 1–4 of this Directive are included in the 
appropriate contracts. 
e. Chief of Defense Nuclear Safety.  Provides independent oversight of the 
implementation of this Order and associated Supplemental Directives by 
NNSA personnel.

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
f. Director, Office of Stockpile Operations. 
(1) Provide federal leadership for project teams formed to develop NE 
operations at NNSA production agencies. 
(2) Ensure that NNSA NEOs are designed in a manner that satisfies the NES 
Program requirements. 
g. Director, Office of Stockpile Modernization. 
(1) Provide federal leadership for project teams formed to develop NEOs at 
NNSA production agencies. 
(2) Ensure that NNSA NEOs are designed in a manner that satisfies the NES 
Program requirements. 
h. Director, Office of Stockpile Production Integration. 
(1) Manage the NNSA NES evaluation processes. 
(2) Provide support to NNSA field element offices as needed for NES 
oversight of the NNSA M&O contractors. 
i. Chair, Nuclear Explosive Safety Study Group. 
(1) Implement the NNSA NES evaluation processes. 
(2) Provide the official interpretation of the NES Standards and other NES 
criteria for use by the NESSG during the performance of NES evaluations 
per paragraph 4.a.(3). 
j. Contracting Officer.  For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a 
site/facility management contract is affected by this Order, the Contracting 
Officer(s) shall incorporate the requirements into the affected contract(s) via the 
“Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or through 
negotiation and modification, as appropriate. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS.  This Order does not invoke any DOE technical standards or 
industry standards as required methods.  Any technical standard or industry standard that 
is mentioned in or referenced by this Order is not invoked by this Order.  Note: 
DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J, provides a definition for “invoked technical standard.” 
7. DEFINITIONS.  Definitions from DOE O 452.1, current version, are not repeated here. 
a. Access.  The proximity to an NE that allows the opportunity to divert, steal, 
tamper with, or damage the NE in spite of any controls that have been established 
to prevent such unauthorized actions. 
b. Custody of Nuclear Explosives.  Responsibility for access to and control of NEs.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 452.2 13 
08-05-2026 
c. Dummy Pit.  A component or set of components designed to simulate a live pit, 
but which does not contain fissile material and cannot create an NE if placed in 
the central cavity of an implosion system.  A “high-fidelity” dummy pit is one 
that also has dimensions representative of a live pit. 
d. Electrical Equipment.  Includes items that contain or use an electrical energy 
source and the interface (if any) with the NE.  For Category 1 electrical 
equipment (as defined in Attachment 2 of this Order), this includes associated 
adapters, test cables, switch boxes, etc.  For some Category 2 electrical equipment 
(as defined in Attachment 2 of this Order), this includes a mechanical connection 
to the NE and associated electrical isolation features.  Category 3 electrical 
equipment does not interface with the NE. 
e. Facility.  Any equipment, structure, system, process, or activity that fulfills a 
specific purpose. 
f. Human Factors.  A scientific discipline that applies knowledge about human 
abilities, characteristics, and limitations to design of tasks, equipment, 
and environments. 
g. Human Reliability Program (HRP).  A program established by 10 CFR § 712, 
Human Reliability Program, to ensure that individuals who occupy positions 
affording access to certain materials, NE devices, facilities, and programs meet 
the highest standards of reliability and physical and mental suitability. 
h. Main Charge.  The high explosive that implodes the pit. 
i. Mock High Explosive.  A material that is designed to simulate the main-charge 
high explosive, but which is non-detonable and clear or colored pink. 
j. Mock Primary.  A surrogate NE in its basic configuration (i.e., consisting of mock 
high explosive and dummy pit designed to simulate the geometry of a primary). 
k. Nuclear Explosive Assembly.  An assembly made up of an NE subassembly and a 
higher level of assembly up to a fully assembled weapon configuration. 
l. Nuclear Explosive Subassembly.  A subassembly made up of a main charge high 
explosive and a pit. 
m. Nuclear Explosive Duty.  Work assignments that allow custody of an NE or 
access to an NE device or area. 
n. Nuclear Explosive-Like Assembly.  An assembly that resembles an NE in the 
U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile (past, present, or planned) and represents an NE 
in its basic configuration (main-charge high explosive and pit) or any higher level 
of assembly up to a fully assembled weapon configuration (mock primary, trainer, 
Joint Test Assembly, etc.).  An NELA is not capable of producing a nuclear 
explosive detonation and does not contain both main-charge high explosive and a 
live pit.

--- page 14 ---
14 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
o. Nuclear Explosive Operation Associated Activities.  Activities directly associated 
with a specific NEO, such as work on a bomb nose or tail subassembly, even 
when physically separated from the bomb’s NE subassembly. 
p. Nuclear Explosive Safety Rules.  Requirements that significantly contribute to 
minimizing the possibility of NE detonation or aerosolized dispersal in NEOs. 
q. One-Point Safe Nuclear Explosive.  An NE that, in the event a detonation, is 
initiated at any one point in the high-explosive system, presents no greater 
probability than one in a million of producing an NE yield of greater than 
4 pounds of TNT equivalent. 
r. Permanent Marking.  A durable method, normally by metal deformation or 
engraving, indicating on an external area of an assembly, whether it is an NE or 
an NELA. 
s. Safe and Stable.  Stabilization of an NE intended to ensure it is placed in a 
configuration that precludes potential hazards from affecting the unit, using the 
minimum actions necessary. 
t. Safety Basis.  The documented safety analysis and hazard controls that provide 
reasonable assurance that a DOE nuclear facility can be operated safely in a 
manner that adequately protects workers, the public, and the environment. 
u. Two-Person Concept.  A concept of operations implemented to ensure no lone 
individual has unrestricted access to an NE or other crucial asset as specified by 
this Order. 
8. REFERENCES.  The following list contains references that are relevant to this Order. 
a. P.L. 106-65, Title 32, The National Nuclear Security Administration Act, dated 
October 5, 1999, as amended, which established a separately organized agency 
within the DOE. 
b. 10 CFR § 712, Human Reliability Program, which establishes the policies 
and procedures for the DOE, including NNSA, HRP.  The HRP is a security 
and safety reliability program designed to ensure that individuals who occupy 
positions affording access to certain materials, NE devices, facilities, and 
programs meet the highest standards of reliability and physical and 
mental suitability. 
c. 10 CFR § 820, Procedural Rules for DOE Nuclear Activities, which sets forth 
procedures to govern the conduct of persons involved in DOE nuclear activities 
and, in particular, to achieve compliance with the DOE Nuclear Safety 
Requirements by all persons subject to those requirements.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 452.2 15 
08-05-2026 
d. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management, which governs the conduct of DOE 
contractors, DOE personnel, and other persons conducting activities (including 
providing items and services) that affect, or may affect, the safety of DOE 
nuclear facilities. 
e. Joint DOE/Department of Defense (DOE/DoD) Technical Publication 20-7, 
Chg 6, Nuclear Safety Criteria, dated July 20, 2016. 
f. Joint DOE/DoD Technical Publication 35-51, Chg. 4, General Instructions 
Applicable to Nuclear Weapons, dated December 21, 2016. 
g. Joint DOE/DoD Technical Publication 45-51, Chg. 8, Transportation of Nuclear 
Weapons Materiel, General Shipping and Limited Life Component Data (LLC), 
dated November 17, 2017. 
h. Joint DOE/DoD Technical Publication 45-51A, Chg. 3, Transportation of Nuclear 
Weapons Materiel (Supplement), Shipping and Identification Data for Stockpile 
Major Assemblies, dated September 13, 2016. 
i. DOE O 151.1, Comprehensive Emergency Management System, current version, 
which addresses responses to unplanned events. 
j. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current 
version, which provides direction for implementing DOE Policy (P) 226.2, Policy 
for Federal Oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems, current version, which 
establishes DOE policy for assurance systems and processes established by DOE 
contractors and oversight programs performed by DOE line management and 
independent oversight organizations. 
k. DOE O 231.1, Environment, Safety, and Health Reporting, current version, 
defines a minimum set of occurrence reporting requirements for DOE (including 
NNSA) Elements and contractors and includes categorizing occurrences related to 
safety, environment, health, or operations; notifying DOE; and developing 
follow-up reports. 
l. DOE O 232.2, Occurrence Reporting and Processing of Operations Information, 
current version, which provides requirements for categorizing and reporting 
non-emergency NES occurrences. 
m. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version, which provides a 
framework for managing information in accordance with Department policy and 
National Archives and Records Administration-approved DOE record schedules. 
n. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version, which details 
the process for requesting exemptions from directives requirements.

--- page 16 ---
16 DOE O 452.2 
 08-05-2026 
o. DOE O 360.1, Federal Employee Training, current version, which establishes 
requirements and assigns responsibilities for DOE federal employee training, 
education, and development under the Government Employees Training Act of 
1958, as amended. 
p. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version, which ensures that the quality 
of DOE (including NNSA) products and services meets or exceeds the 
customers’ expectations. 
q. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version, which establishes the DOE 
(including NNSA) facility safety for nuclear safety design, criticality safety, fire 
protection, and natural phenomena hazards mitigation, and includes the 
configuration management requirements for Safety SSCs. 
r. DOE O 426.2, Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification 
Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities, current version, which establishes 
selection, qualification, and training requirements for M&O contractor personnel 
involved in the operation, maintenance, and technical support of DOE (including 
NNSA) Category A and B reactors and nonreactor nuclear facilities. 
s. DOE O 433.1, Maintenance Management Program for DOE Nuclear Facilities, 
current version, which defines the safety management program required for 
maintenance and the reliable performance of SSCs that are part of the safety basis. 
t. DOE O 452.1, Nuclear Explosive and Weapon Surety Program, current version, 
which establishes requirements and responsibilities for the DOE Nuclear 
Explosive and Weapon Surety Program. 
u. DOE O 461.1, Packaging and Transportation for Offsite Shipment of Materials of 
National Security Interest, current version, which establishes requirements and 
responsibilities for the packaging and transportation of all DOE offsite shipments 
of materials of national security interest. 
v. NNSA SD 452.2, Nuclear Explosive Safety Evaluation Processes, current version, 
which provides requirements and guidance for NESSs, operational safety reviews, 
and NE safety change evaluations. 
w. DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design 
Criteria for DOE Facilities, dated December 4, 2016, provides criteria and 
guidance for the analysis and design of facility SSCs that are necessary to 
implement the requirements of DOE O 420.1C, Facility Safety, and to ensure that 
the SSCs will be able to effectively perform their intended safety functions under 
the effects of NPHs.  Note: DOE-STD-1020 is not applicable to DOE mobile 
conveyances used for transportation of NEs. 
x. DOE-STD-1073-2016, Configuration Management, dated December 23, 2016, 
defines the objectives of a configuration management process for DOE nuclear 
facilities (including activities and operations) and provides detailed examples and 
supplementary guidance on methods to achieve those objectives.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 452.2 17 
08-05-2026 
y. DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety Basis and 
Safety Design Basis Documents, dated December 21, 2016, which describes DOE 
review and approval of documented safety analyses and TSRs for existing Hazard 
Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities that document their safety basis in 
accordance with 10 CFR § 830. 
z. DOE-STD-1212-2019, Explosives Safety, dated November 27, 2019, which 
describes DOE’s explosives safety requirements applicable to operations 
involving the development, testing, handling, and processing of explosives or 
assemblies containing explosives. 
aa. DOE-STD-3009-94, Chg. 3, Preparation Guide for U.S. Department of Energy 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety Analyses, dated March 2006, 
which describes a safety analysis report preparation method that satisfies 
10 CFR § 830 requirements. 
bb. DOE-STD-3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented 
Safety Analyses (DSA), dated November 12, 2014, which provides an acceptable 
methodology for meeting the 10 CFR § 830 requirements for the preparation of 
DSAs for both new and existing nonreactor nuclear facilities. 
cc. DOE-NA-STD-3016-2018, Hazard Analysis Reports for Nuclear Explosive 
Operations, dated October 16, 2018, which clarifies the requirements and 
provides guidance for conducting hazard analyses and preparing hazard analysis 
reports for NEOs and associated activities. 
9. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Chief of 
Defense Nuclear Safety, (505) 845-4404. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 18 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 1 – Tw o-Person Concept Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
TWO-PERSON CONCEPT REQUIREMENTS 
Note:  This attachment applies to both federal and contractor organizations. 
1. BASIC REQUIREMENTS.  The two-person concept (TPC) is implemented to ensure no 
lone individual has unrestricted access to a nuclear explosive.  A TPC team must be in 
the nuclear explosive area (NEA) when a nuclear explosive is not protected by a 
dual-lock system or other Nuclear Explosive Safety Study Group (NESSG)-evaluated 
security system.  The TPC is also required for Category 1 electrical equipment as 
specified in Attachment 2, paragraph 2.c., of this Order and for certain nuclear 
explosive-like assembly (NELA) verification and assembly steps as specified in 
Attachment 3, paragraph 4., of this Order.  National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) field element offices may also require TPC protection for other operations 
or equipment. 
Each person on a TPC team must: 
a. Be certified in the Human Reliability Program, 
b. Have authorized access to the NEA, 
c. Have technical knowledge of the task being performed, 
d. Be knowledgeable of pertinent safety and security requirements, and 
e. Be in a position to detect incorrect or unauthorized acts and take 
appropriate action. 
2. IMPLEMENTATION OPTIONS.  The TPC may be implemented using either zone 
coverage or person-to-person coverage. 
a. Zone Coverage.  Zone coverage is a term used to identify TPC 
implementation that meets the basic requirements of paragraph 1 without the 
additional requirements specified to protect configurations that require 
person-to-person coverage. 
b. Person-to-Person Coverage.  Person-to-person coverage is the more stringent 
form of the TPC.  Person-to-person coverage is designed to protect configurations 
that are particularly vulnerable to inadvertent acts (errors of omission or 
commission) or deliberate unauthorized acts. 
(1) Configurations requiring person-to-person coverage include the following: 
(a) Exposed conventional high-explosive (CHE) main charge in 
an NEA.

--- page 19 ---
Attachment 1 – Two-Person Concept Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page 1-2 08-05-2026 
(b) Main-charge high explosives (HEs), both CHE and insensitive 
high explosive (IHE), with accessible detonator cable assemblies 
in an NEA. 
(c) Nuclear explosives connected to Category 1 electrical equipment 
(Category 1 electrical equipment is described in Attachment 2, 
paragraph 2., of this Order.) 
(2) In addition, configurations requiring person-to-person coverage may be 
determined based on specific system characteristics.  The application of 
person-to-person coverage allows recognition of the protection provided 
by design features (such as IHE, coded-signal-controlled detonators, and 
unique-signal-operated strong-link devices) and physical protection (such 
as closed shipping and storage containers and specially designed covers). 
3. WHEN TO APPLY PERSON-TO-PERSON COVERAGE. 
a. Assembly and Disassembly Operations Involving CHE Main Charge. 
(1) For assembly operations involving CHE main charge, person-to-person 
coverage of the CHE components must begin when the CHE container is 
opened in an NEA. 
(2) Coverage continues until the nuclear explosive is in a configuration in 
which the application of design-specific environmental stimuli or unique 
or coded signals is necessary for nuclear explosive detonation or 
detonation of the main charge HE. 
(3) For disassembly operations, this requirement applies in reverse. 
b. Assembly and Disassembly Operations Involving IHE Main Charge. 
(1) For assembly operations involving IHE main charge, person-to-person 
coverage must be provided for main-charge components located in an 
NEA and assemblies containing these components that have accessible 
detonator cables attached. 
(2) Coverage must continue until the nuclear explosive is in a configuration in 
which the application of design-specified environmental stimuli or unique 
or coded signals is necessary for nuclear explosive detonation or 
detonation of the main-charge HE. 
(3) For disassembly operations this requirement applies in reverse.

--- page 20 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 1 – Tw o-Person Concept Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page 1-3 
c. For purposes of person-to-person coverage, systems with installed and unactuated 
(safe or reset) mechanical safe and arm detonators are not considered to have 
accessible detonator cables.  Configurations with physical protection that 
precludes immediate and unrestricted access to the configuration by a lone 
individual are not considered to be exposed.  When such physical protection is in 
place, zone coverage provides adequate protection for configurations that would 
otherwise require person-to-person coverage. 
4. HOW TO APPLY PERSON-TO-PERSON COVERAGE.  When a configuration requires 
person-to-person coverage, a qualified TPC team must be either working on or 
controlling access to the configuration.  Specific person-to-person coverage requirements 
are as follows. 
a. Lone individuals must not be allowed within the immediate vicinity 
(approximately 6 feet) of a configuration that requires person-to-person coverage. 
b. The two people providing person-to-person coverage must each be responsible for 
the safe conduct of the operations. 
c. During the performance of operations on a configuration requiring person-to-
person coverage: 
(1) The TPC team must be in the immediate vicinity of the configuration; 
(2) Each person on the TPC team must observe all operations, ensure that 
only authorized operations are performed, and ensure that operations are 
performed correctly; and 
(3) A reader-worker process that includes the following must be incorporated. 
(a) The procedure must be read aloud, the operation must be 
performed, and the completion of the operation must be 
documented in the stated sequence. 
(b) One of the two people performing the operation may read the 
procedure aloud provided that both people can move away from 
the immediate vicinity of the configuration while the reading 
is accomplished. 
(c) If both people cannot move away from the immediate vicinity of 
the configuration while the reading is accomplished, then a third 
person must read the procedure aloud. 
(4) Based on an approved NES evaluation, other means to achieve the person-
to-person coverage objective may be authorized.

--- page 21 ---
Attachment 1 – Two-Person Concept Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page 1-4 08-05-2026 
d. When operations are not being performed on a configuration requiring person-to-
person coverage: 
(1) The TPC team must be in the immediate vicinity of the configuration 
when another individual is in the immediate vicinity of the configuration. 
(2) The TPC team is not required to be in the immediate vicinity of the 
configuration when other individuals are not in the immediate vicinity of 
the configuration.  However, team members must remain in a position to 
directly observe the approach of any individual to the configuration. 
e. Only one configuration requiring person-to-person coverage is allowed in a 
vacated bay or cell.  This requirement does not apply to emergency evacuations.

--- page 22 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 2 – Elect rical Equipment Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page 2-1 
ATTACHMENT 2 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Note:  This attachment applies to both federal and contractor organizations. 
1. BASIC REQUIREMENTS.  For purposes of defining electrical equipment requirements, 
this Order categorizes electrical equipment used in nuclear explosive areas (NEAs) as 
Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3.  Electrical equipment categorization is intended to 
ensure that controls are implemented commensurate with the various levels of potential 
electrical threat. 
As used in this attachment, a high-explosive (HE) subassembly is defined to be a main-
charge HE component with at least one detonator attached. 
2. CATEGORY 1 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  Electrical equipment intended for 
connection to an electrical circuit of a nuclear explosive (NE) or main charge HE 
subassembly is referred to as Category 1 electrical equipment.  Category 1 electrical 
equipment must be clearly identified and meet the following minimum requirements. 
a. General Requirements. 
(1) Each item of Category 1 electrical equipment must have safety features 
independent of the NE’s safety features. 
(2) Category 1 electrical equipment must have a safety requirements 
document that identifies the safety features. 
(3) Category 1 electrical equipment must use the lowest values of internal and 
output currents and voltages required to perform the function(s) and be 
documented and justified. 
(4) Category 1 electrical equipment must not apply unacceptable stimuli or 
electrical energy in excess of its design limits as the result of a single-
point failure. 
(5) Each item of Category 1 electrical equipment and its interface with an NE 
require the performance and documentation of a comprehensive safety 
analysis, including consideration of relevant abnormal environments. 
(6) Nuclear Explosive Safety (NES) evaluations. 
(a) An NES evaluation of Category 1 electrical equipment and its 
interface with an NE is required prior to its implementation in an 
NE operation.  When this activity is performed on an NE with a 
defined safety theme determined to be intact, using approved 
Category 1 electrical equipment, the following requirements may 
be rescinded based upon an evaluation of the challenge to the 
safety theme.

--- page 23 ---
Attachment 2 – Electrical Equipment Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page 2-2 08-05-2026 
(b) An NES evaluation is required prior to changing approved 
Category 1 electrical equipment if the defined safety of the NE is 
not intact. 
Note:  Approved Category 1 electrical equipment is under formal 
NES change control and authorized for use in a nuclear explosive 
operation (NEO). 
(7) Procedures must be established to operate, control, calibrate, maintain, and 
store Category 1 electrical equipment. 
(8) A record of approved Category 1 electrical equipment must be established 
and maintained.  The record must identify each item of Category 1 
electrical equipment by its unique designation or part number and 
associate it with the nuclear explosives for which it is authorized and the 
NES evaluations that examined its specific applications. 
(9) Category 1 electrical equipment shall incorporate engineered tamper 
indication features.  These features shall be inspected prior to each use, to 
include calibration and maintenance. 
b. Computer-Controlled Electrical Equipment. 
(1) When software is used to achieve the safe state of the unit under test, a 
separate (non-software) means of verification must also be employed to 
verify the safe state of the unit.  Verification must be done before relying 
on the safe state of tested components. 
(2) If software is used to evaluate the safe state of a unit, a separate 
independent means of verification must also be employed to verify the 
safe state of the unit.  If a separate means of verification is not feasible, 
other Nuclear Explosive Safety Study Group (NESSG)-evaluated positive 
measures must be incorporated to ensure the electrical equipment is 
performing as intended immediately before and after a test. 
(3) Category 1 electrical equipment must be designed such that software is 
incapable of causing bypass of any safety feature of the 
electrical equipment. 
(4) Software failure must not compromise the safety attributes of the 
equipment or unit under test. 
(5) A formal software safety analysis is required to document compliance 
with the requirements in paragraphs 2.b.(3) and 2.b.(4).

--- page 24 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 2 – Elect rical Equipment Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page 2-3 
(6) Software and firmware shall be developed, tested, installed, and updated 
using secure processes to guarantee functionality and minimize the risk 
of alteration. 
(7) Software and firmware attributes shall be verified prior to each use. 
c. Two-Person Concept.  Category 1 electrical equipment requires TPC protection.  
(The TPC is delineated in Attachment 1 of this Order.) 
(1) Person-to-person coverage is required during calibration and all operations 
that afford internal access to Category 1 electrical equipment and 
associated cables and adapters and while Category 1 electrical equipment 
is connected to a nuclear explosive. 
(2) Zone coverage is required for fully assembled Category 1 electrical 
equipment and associated cables and adapters when that equipment is 
not protected by a dual-lock system or other NESSG-evaluated 
security system. 
3. CATEGORY 2 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  Electrical equipment that is not intended 
for connection to an electrical circuit of a nuclear explosive or HE subassembly, but 
makes mechanical connection to, or could come in contact with, a nuclear explosive or 
HE subassembly, is referred to as Category 2 electrical equipment.  Category 2 electrical 
equipment must be clearly identified and meet the following minimum requirements. 
a. General Requirements. 
(1) Category 2 electrical equipment must not be intentionally connected to the 
electrical circuitry of a nuclear explosive or HE subassembly. 
(2) Category 2 electrical equipment must be positioned in a manner to 
preclude contact with a nuclear explosive or HE subassembly except 
when a mechanical connection is required to perform its intended and 
authorized function. 
(3) The potential for inadvertent connection between the Category 2 electrical 
equipment and the NE circuitry must be minimized.  This is based upon 
postulated scenarios that could cause unintended electrical contact. 
b. Positive Electrical Isolation.  Positive electrical isolation, requiring at least two 
independent features, must be established and demonstrated for Category 2 
electrical equipment that makes a mechanical connection to a nuclear explosive or 
main charge HE subassembly.  Electrical isolation must account for both normal 
and credible abnormal conditions (such as equipment faults or lightning strikes).  
The electrical isolation scheme used must be clearly identified and documented 
(including the technical basis for the “defined safe value” used in 
paragraphs 3.b.(1) and 3.b.(2) below) using one of the following subcategories, 
listed in priority order.

--- page 25 ---
Attachment 2 – Electrical Equipment Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page 2-4 08-05-2026 
(1) Path-on isolation reducing leakage or fault current from electrical energy 
sources associated with the equipment to a defined safe value.  This must 
be verified annually. 
(2) Path-off isolation reducing leakage or fault current from electrical energy 
sources associated with the equipment to a defined safe value.  This must 
be verified annually. 
(3) An electrical isolation scheme requiring at least two independent failures 
before exposing the nuclear explosive to unacceptable leakage or fault 
current from electrical energy sources associated with the equipment.  
Each failure mechanism must be identified. 
c. Records.  A record of approved Category 2 electrical equipment must be 
established and maintained.  The record must identify each item of Category 2 
electrical equipment by its unique designation or part number and associate it with 
the nuclear explosive operations for which it is authorized. 
4. CATEGORY 3 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  Moveable and facility electrical 
equipment used in an NEA that is not intended for connection to an electrical circuit of a 
nuclear explosive or HE subassembly and does not make mechanical connection to, and 
cannot come in contact with, a nuclear explosive or HE subassembly is referred to as 
Category 3 electrical equipment. 
5. NES EVALUATIONS AND CHANGE CONTROL.  Electrical equipment used in NEAs 
and proposed changes to electrical equipment, procedures, and interfaces with a nuclear 
explosive are subject to the NES evaluation and NEO change control processes required 
by this Order and detailed in National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) Supplemental Directive 452.2, Nuclear Explosive Safety Evaluation Processes, 
current version.  Per paragraph 2a.(6)(a), when electrical equipment operations are 
performed on an NE with an intact defined safety theme, the following requirements may 
be rescinded based upon an NES evaluation of the adequacy and efficacy of the 
safety theme. 
a. An NES evaluation of Category 1 electrical equipment and its interface with a 
nuclear explosive is required prior to its implementation in a nuclear 
explosive operation. 
b. An NES evaluation is required prior to changing approved Category 1 electrical 
equipment if the defined safety of the NE is not intact. 
DA documents which specify general design and process requirements for Category 1 
electrical equipment used on nuclear explosives (e.g., DG10001 and EP401075) are 
subject to NES evaluation (i.e., during applicable evaluations such as the Approved 
Equipment Program Master Study).  Changes to these documents must be concurred on 
by each DA NES organization.  This concurrence must be documented in an engineering 
authorization.  However, each change does not require formal NESSG review.

--- page 26 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 3 -N uclear Explosive-Like Assembly (NELA) Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page: 3-1 
ATTACHMENT 3 
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLY (NELA) REQUIREMENTS 
For Sites With and Without a Nuclear Explosive Operation (NEO) Mission 
1. NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLY (NELA) DETERMINATIONS. 
a. All new NELA determinations must be documented, justified, and auditable. 
b. Where practicable, determinations should be made as early in the project planning 
stages as possible (e.g., design). 
Note for non-NEO sites: Section 1 applies. 
2. NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLY DESCRIPTION. 
a. An NELA may exist at any level of assembly from one representing a basic 
nuclear explosive configuration (HE and pit) up to and including one representing 
a fully assembled weapon configuration (mock primary, trainer, Joint Test 
Assembly, etc.). 
b. All NELAs have the following two attributes: 
(1) An NELA resembles a nuclear explosive in the U.S. nuclear weapons 
stockpile (past, present, or planned) to the degree that it can be mistaken 
for a nuclear explosive without any disassembly. 
(2) An NELA lacks main charge high explosive (HE) (or propellant), primary 
fissile material, or both. 
Note for non-NEO sites: Section 2 applies. 
3. NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLY TYPES. 
a. There are three types of NELAs: 
(1) High-explosive (HE) NELA.  Contains live HE main charge and dummy 
pit, void, or other non-nuclear items in place of the live pit. 
(2) Inert-with-Live-Pit NELA.  Contains a live pit and mock HE, void, or 
substitute non-explosive material in place of the main charge. 
(3) Inert NELA.  Contains mock HE, void, or substitute non-explosive 
material in place of the main charge and a dummy pit, void, or other non-
nuclear items in place of the live pit. 
Note for non-NEO sites:  Section 3 applies.

--- page 27 ---
Attachment 3 -Nuclear Explosive-Like Assembly (NELA) Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page: 3-2 08-05-2026 
4. VERIFICATION OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLY COMPONENTS 
BEFORE ASSEMBLY. 
Verification requirements are not necessary for NELA configurations for which physical 
dimensions preclude substitution of live main charge and pit components. 
When radiation detection or chemical verifications are performed, auditable records are 
required. 
a. High Explosive NELAs. 
(1) Sites with NEO Mission. 
(a) High-Fidelity Dummy Pit Verification Requirements. 
1 Before assembly, the high-fidelity dummy pit must be 
examined by radiation detection means to verify absence of 
radioactive material.  If radiation is detected, gamma 
spectrometry assay is required.  Verification must be 
performed or observed by a TPC team. 
2 After verification, the pit must be controlled by a TPC 
team, dual-lock, or other NESSG-evaluated security system 
until assembly. 
3 An auditable record of verification must be available. 
(b) Main Charge HE Introduction Sequence.  Verification must be 
completed before introduction of main charge HE and dummy pit 
into the same immediate assembly area. 
(2) Sites without NEO Mission. 
(a) Assembly in Facility NOT Authorized to Receive or Handle Live 
Pits. 
1 High-fidelity dummy pit must be examined by radiation 
detection means before assembly.  Gamma spectrometry 
assay if radiation is detected. 
(b) Assembly in Facility Authorized to Receive or Handle Live Pits. 
1 Paragraph 4.a.(1) applies. 
2 If security system is not evaluated by NESSG, dual-lock or 
other security system must be reviewed by HQ 
NNSA/Nuclear Explosive Safety Division.

--- page 28 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 3 -N uclear Explosive-Like Assembly (NELA) Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page: 3-3 
(c) Main Charge HE Introduction Sequence.  Section 4.a(2) applies. 
(d) Inert-with-Live-Pit NELAs. 
(3) Sites with NEO Mission. 
(a) Mock High Explosive Verification Requirements. 
1 TPC team required for all assembly/disassembly. 
2 Mock HE must be non-detonable, clear or pink; pink mock 
HE must be chemically verified before assembly. 
3 TPC chemical verification required for pink mock HE 
before assembly. 
4 Control of mock HE after verification by TPC team, dual-
lock, or NESSG-evaluated security system. 
(b) Live Pit Introduction Sequence.  Verifications must be completed 
before introduction of the mock HE and live pit into the same 
immediate assembly area. 
(4) Sites without NEO mission. 
(a) Assembly in Facility NOT Authorized to Receive or Handle 
Main-Charge HE. 
1 Mock HE must be non-detonable, clear or pink; pink mock 
HE chemically verified before assembly. 
(b) Assembly in Facility Authorized to Receive or Handle Main-
Charge HE. 
1 Section 4.b.(1) applies. 
2 If security system is not evaluated by NESSG, dual-lock or 
other security system must be reviewed by HQ 
NNSA/Nuclear Explosive Safety Division. 
3 Live Pit Introduction Sequence: Section 4.b.(2) applies. 
b. Inert NELAs. 
(1) Sites with NEO Mission. 
(a) Mock HE Verification Requirements.

--- page 29 ---
Attachment 3 -Nuclear Explosive-Like Assembly (NELA) Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page: 3-4 08-05-2026 
1 Verification repetition NOT necessary for repeated training 
if mock HE and dummy pit remain in training area where 
live HE and pits are not authorized. 
2 Mock HE must be non-detonable, clear or pink; pink mock 
HE chemically verified before assembly. 
(b) Dummy Pit Verification Requirements. 
1 Dummy pit must be examined by radiation detection means 
before assembly; gamma spectrometry assay if radiation is 
detected. 
2 Control of dummy pit after verification by TPC team, dual-
lock, or NESSG-evaluated security system. 
(2) Sites without NEO Mission. 
(a) Assembly in Facility NOT Authorized to Receive or Handle Main 
Charge HE AND/OR Live Pits. 
1 Mock HE must be non-detonable, clear or pink; pink mock 
HE chemically verified before assembly. 
2 Dummy pit must be examined by radiation detection means 
before assembly; gamma spectrometry assay if radiation is 
detected. 
(b) Assembly in Facility Authorized to Receive or Handle Main 
Charge HE AND/OR Live Pits. 
1 Sections 4.c.(1) and 4.c.(2) apply. 
2 If security system is not evaluated by NESSG, dual-lock or 
other security system must be reviewed by HQ 
NNSA/Nuclear Explosive Safety Division. 
5. ASSEMBLY AND DISASSEMBLY OF NELAs. 
a. NELAs must not be assembled or disassembled in close proximity (same 
immediate assembly/disassembly area) to other activities where components 
could be interchanged.  This includes collocated assembly/disassembly of: 
(1) Any NELA type and a nuclear explosive. 
(2) Any NELA type and a different NELA type.

--- page 30 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 3 -N uclear Explosive-Like Assembly (NELA) Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page: 3-5 
b. Sites without NEO Mission. 
(1) For sites meeting protection requirements for Category III SNM, these 
restrictions do not apply. 
(2) If operational constraints require collocation of inert and live pit NELAs 
during assembly/disassembly, operational justification must be reviewed 
and approved by HQ NNSA/Nuclear Explosive Safety Division. 
6. OFFSITE TRANSPORTATION OF NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE-LIKE ASSEMBLIES. 
a. NELAs considered materials of national security interest must follow packaging 
and transportation requirements per DOE Order (O) 461.1C, Packaging and 
Transfer of Materials of National Security Interest.  Additional requirements: 
(1) Inert-with-Live-Pit NELA configurations must not be transferred to 
Department of War custody. 
(2) External identification of NELA contents (HE, inert-with-live-pit, or 
inert), responsible persons at shipping and receiving locations. 
(3) Permission to ship between NNSA sites must be obtained from receiving 
agency. 
(4) NELA must be surveyed by radiation detection means before offsite 
transfer; anomalies resolved before shipment; auditable record required. 
(5) NELA must be surveyed upon receipt; anomalies resolved before release; 
auditable record required. 
Note for non-NEO sites: Section 6 applies.

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 4 -Marking Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page: 4-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 
MARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Note:  This attachment applies to both federal and contractor organizations.  Nuclear explosives 
and nuclear explosive-like assemblies (NELAs) must be permanently marked in accordance with 
the following requirements.  Additional markings such as serial numbers and configuration 
identification may also be required by design agencies. 
1. PERMANENT MARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR NELAs AT SITES WITHOUT A 
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE OPERATION (NEO) MISSION.  NELAs at sites not 
authorized to conduct nuclear explosive operations (NEOs) that are staged or stored in a 
facility not authorized to introduce the missing component that would form a nuclear 
explosive (live main-charge high explosive (HE), live pits, or both), and designated for 
irreversible destruction within 6 months of assembly, are not required to be permanently 
marked.  Where practicable, temporary markings or identification such as tagging or 
stenciling should be applied to the configuration or container. 
2. SITES ONLY REQUIRED TO MEET PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR 
CATEGORY III SPECIAL NUCLEAR MATERIAL (SNM).  NELAs at sites meeting 
the protection requirements for Category III SNM are not required to be permanently 
marked until the NELA is transferred offsite.  Where practicable, temporary markings or 
identification such as tagging or stenciling should be applied to the configuration or 
container.  Prior to offsite transfer, the permanent marking requirements of this 
attachment, paragraphs 3, 4, 5, and 6 apply. 
3. PERMANENT MARKING LEGENDS. 
a. Nuclear Explosives.  A “NUCLEAR” permanent marking legend must be applied 
to nuclear explosives (i.e., units containing a live pit and an HE main charge). 
b. Nuclear Explosive-Like Assemblies. 
(1) High Explosive NELAs.  The “HIGH EXPLOSIVE” permanent marking 
is applied to an NELA containing live main charge HE and a dummy pit, 
void, or other non-nuclear items in place of the live pit. 
(2) Inert-with-Live-Pit NELAs.  The “INERT-WITH-LIVE-PIT” permanent 
marking is applied to an NELA containing a live pit and mock HE, void, 
or substitute non-explosive material in place of the live main charge HE. 
(3) Inert NELAs.  The “INERT” permanent marking is applied to an NELA 
containing mock HE, void, or substitute non-explosive material in place of 
the live main charge HE and a dummy pit, void, or other non-nuclear 
items in place of the live pit. 
Note:  Using the permanent marking “INERT” or “INERT WITH LIVE 
PIT” does not preclude the presence of materials that may present a hazard 
to personnel.

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 4 -Marking Requirements DOE O 452.2 
Page: 4-2 08-05-2026 
4. PERMANENT MARKING LOCATION.  Nuclear explosives and NELAs must be 
permanently marked on an external surface. 
a. The permanent marking must be on a part that encloses the live main charge or 
mock HE. 
b. The marking location must be specified by the applicable design agency (DA). 
5. PERMANENT MARKINGS.  Nuclear explosives and NELAs must be marked in 
accordance with the following requirements.  The particular marking method must be 
specified by the applicable DA. 
a. The permanent marking method must produce the most durable mark possible, 
consistent with acceptable deleterious effect on the material to which the marking 
is applied. 
(1) The preferred marking methods are mechanical engraving (with or without 
fill) and impression-die stamping. 
(2) Other acceptable methods are impression freehand, impression sandblast, 
and surface conversion. 
b. The preferred marking size is 1/4-inch characters with 1/4-inch spacing between 
lines, if space permits. 
6. PERMANENT MARKING OBLITERATION.  When a nuclear explosive or NELA is 
altered or disassembled to the point that its permanent marking is no longer valid, the 
permanent marking must be obliterated in accordance with the following requirements. 
a. Methodology. 
(1) The preferred method of obliteration is overprinting the letter “X” on each 
letter of the permanent marking legend using the same permanent marking 
method as that used to apply the original marking. 
(2) If obliteration by overprinting is not feasible for technical reasons, the 
permanent marking must be removed using a method specified by the 
applicable DA. 
b. Components That Will Be Reassembled.  Permanent marking need not be 
obliterated on marked components that will be reassembled into the same 
configuration in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1) After the marked component is removed, the disassembled components 
must be controlled until the disassembled components and marked 
component are reassembled into the same configuration.

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 452.2 Attachment 4-Marking Requirements 
08-05-2026 Page: 4-3 
(2) Prior to final assembly of a nuclear explosive or NELA, verification of the 
permanent marking(s) shall be performed and documented by two human 
reliability program (HRP)-certified personnel.  Dual (or concurrent) 
verification is acceptable. 
Positive measures must be in place to ensure that NELA permanently 
marked components are not inadvertently introduced into areas where 
nuclear explosive assembly or disassembly operations are ongoing.
