--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, H ealth, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  PERSONNEL SELECTION, TRAINING, QUALIFICATION, AND 
CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DOE NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE. 
a. This Order establishes personnel selection, training, qualification, and 
certification requirements for all contractor personnel conducting activities 
(including providing items and services) that affect, or may affect, the safety of 
Department of Energy (DOE) nuclear facilities. 
b. Implementation of all requirements in this Order constitutes an acceptable method 
of complying with Title 10 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 830.122, 
Quality assurance criteria, Criterion 2—Management/Personnel Training and 
Qualification, for the performance of work activities described in this Order. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE Order (O) 426.2A, Chg. 1 (AdminChg), Personnel 
Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear 
Facilities, dated May 30, 2024.  Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or 
otherwise affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive.  
Contractor Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract 
remain in effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or 
regulatory commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer 
applicable or substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability.  This Order applies to all departmental elements, 
including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), responsible for 
the operation of Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 reactors and nonreactor DOE nuclear 
facilities.  The NNSA Administrator will assure that NNSA employees and 
contractors comply with the responsibilities under this directive.  Nothing in this 
Order will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority 
under Section 3212(d) of Public Law 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2000, to establish Administration-specific policies, unless 
disapproved by the Secretary. 
b. DOE Contractors.  The requirements of this Order shall be incorporated into 
applicable contracts, including Management and Operating contracts.  The 
contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this CRD, if 
applicable.  Contractors shall comply with the requirements of applicable federal, 
state, and local laws and regulations in carrying out the requirements of this Order 
unless relief has been granted in writing.  Omission of any applicable law or 
DOE O 426.2B

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 426.2B 
 08-05-2026 
regulation from the Order does not affect the obligation of the contractor to 
comply with such law or regulation.  Contractors must comply with the 
requirements of this Order, except to the extent modified by the equivalencies or 
exemptions identified herein or issued to the contractor in writing by DOE 
utilizing the process outlined in DOE Order (O) 251.1E, Departmental Directives 
Program, including as amended or updated.  Equivalencies or exemptions for 
DOE O 426.2B, Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification 
Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities.  Equivalencies and exemptions to this 
Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1E, current version.  Central 
Technical Authority concurrence is required for both exemptions and 
equivalencies to this Order.EXEMPTION.  This Order does not apply to activities 
that exclusively involve transportation or offering transportation of hazardous 
materials (including radioactive materials), substances, and wastes. 
5. EQUIVALENCY.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities assigned by 
Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, codified at 50 United States 
Code (U.S.C.) §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, and 2511, and to 
ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the 
Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors will implement and oversee requirements and 
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Deputy Administrator’s 
authority, as deemed appropriate. 
6. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. A selection, training, qualification, and certification program (hereafter “training 
and qualification program”), as described in this Order, must be implemented at 
Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 reactor or nonreactor nuclear facilities. 
b. Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for 
complying with the requirements of this CRD consistent with applicable federal 
laws.  The contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of this 
CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the 
contractor’s compliance with the requirements. 
c. The following DOE regulations and directives provide requirements and 
procedures on how training records and information are to be handled 
and protected: 
(1) 10 CFR § 1008, Records Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act). 
7. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Contracting Officer.  For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a 
site/facility management contract is affected by this Order, the Contracting 
Officer(s) shall incorporate the requirements into the affected contract(s) via the 
“Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or through 
negotiation and modification, as appropriate.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 426.2B 3 
08-05-2026 
8. REFERENCES.  See Attachment 2.INVOKED STANDARDS.  This Order does not 
invoke any DOE technical standards or industry standards as required methods.  Any 
technical standard or industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by this Order is 
not invoked by this Order.  Note: DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J, provides a definition for 
“invoked technical standard.” 
10. DEFINITIONS.  See Attachment 3. 
11. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order may be addressed to the Office of Quality 
Assurance and Nuclear Safety Management Programs at nuclearsafety@hq.doe.gov. 
Nuclear Threat Science, (202) 586-4582. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 4 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-I-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER I 
GENERAL TRAINING REQUIREMENTS, HAZARD CATEGORY 1, 2, AND 3 
NONREACTOR AND REACTOR NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE.  The contractor must establish, implement, and maintain a training and 
qualification program that provides reasonable assurance that personnel whose activities 
impact the facility safety basis are selected, trained, qualified, certified (when required), 
remediated, maintained proficient, and requalified/recertified in accordance with the 
provisions of this chapter. 
2. SCOPE.  This chapter covers reactor and nonreactor nuclear facility requirements.  The 
contractor training and qualification program must be developed and maintained using a 
systematic approach to training (SAT) and implemented using a using a graded approach 
commensurate with facility hazards and activity risk. 
2. APPLICABILITY.  Activities exclusively involving transportation/offering 
transportation of hazardous materials (including radioactive materials), substances, and 
wastes are excluded from the requirements of this Order. 
3. EXCLUSIONS.  Activities exclusively involving transportation/offering transportation of 
hazardous materials (including radioactive materials), substances, and wastes are 
excluded from the requirements of this Order. 
4. TRAINING ORGANIZATION. 
a. The contractor must establish one or more training organizations responsible for 
training personnel subject to this Order. 
b. The training organization(s) may support the line organization in identifying, 
meeting, and monitoring training needs and assisting with the implementation of 
an SAT. 
c. Line management retains accountability for safe operations. 
d. For positions requiring certification, the contractor must require management 
endorsement outside the candidate’s immediate supervisor. 
5. CONTRACTOR ASSURANCE.  The contractor must perform periodic assessments of 
nuclear training programs to ensure continued effectiveness and compliance with 
applicable requirements. 
6. TRAINING PROGRAM DOCUMENTATION. 
a. The contractor must develop and maintain a training program that identifies how 
applicable requirements are implemented. 
b. Contractors will apply DOE reciprocity and exception standards to credit previous 
training completed.

--- page 5 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-I-2 08-05-2026 
c. For sites with one or more facilities, the contractor may use a combined program 
provided the document(s) meets all applicable requirements. 
d. The contractor may implement oversight activities that verify program adequacy, 
implementation, and continuing alignment with facility hazards and the 
safety basis. 
7. SYSTEMATIC APPROACH.  The contractor must establish a systematic approach for 
personnel selection, training, qualification, and certification for identified positions 
whose activities impact the safety basis of a nuclear facility. 
8. GRADED APPROACH. 
a. The contractor must apply a graded approach ensuring appropriate training and 
qualification program detail and rigor are commensurate with facility hazards and 
activity risk. 
b. The contractor must document when a risk-informed decision is applied. 
9. CHANGE CONTROL. 
a. The contractor must evaluate changes to facilities, processes, documented safety 
analyses (DSAs), technical safety requirements (TSRs), justifications for 
continued operations, procedures, and applicable regulatory requirements to 
determine impacts on training and qualification programs. 
b. The contractor must update affected training and qualification program 
requirements, as required. 
10. PERSONNEL SELECTION. 
a. The contractor must establish position-specific selection standards (education, 
experience, and medical examination requirements as applicable) consistent 
with job expectations, technical complexity, and knowledge level required for 
safe performance. 
b. Alternative criteria may be defined and implemented for personnel selection 
requirements.  Relevant experience, or a combination of experience and 
education, may be used in lieu of degree requirements on a case-by-case basis. 
c. Consistent application of personnel selection criteria must be documented and 
applied to all personnel in defined positions, including subcontractors. 
11. UNESCORTED FACILITY ACCESS TRAINING (UFAT). 
a. All personnel requiring unescorted access must be trained and evaluated on the 
topics listed below, as applicable to the facility: 
(1) Facility description.

--- page 6 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-I-3 
(2) Access-related policies (including escort duties), procedures, and 
instructions. 
(3) Radiological hazards. 
(4) Facility emergency response actions. 
(5) Industrial hazards. 
(6) Fire response protocol/fire protection program elements. 
(7) Security requirements. 
(8) Facility walkthroughs, as conditions allow. 
12. QUALIFICATION/CERTIFICATION PROGRAMS. 
a. The contractor must establish procedures governing qualification/certification 
processes and document the knowledge, skills, and abilities for defined positions 
and required activities. 
b. The contractor must maintain current and accurate 
qualification/certification records. 
c. Unqualified/uncertified personnel or personnel in training must be under the 
direct supervision of a qualified individual. 
d. Qualifications/certifications may be revoked for cause such as medical 
disqualification or performance deficiencies. 
e. The contractor may establish a provisional qualification process to define and 
document progression towards meeting full qualification/certification.  This status 
allows limited operations. 
13. CERTIFICATION. 
a. Certification endorsements must be documented and completed after qualification 
and any additional required elements (e.g., evaluations, medical examination 
if applicable). 
b. Personnel handling significant quantities of fissionable material must be certified.  
Personnel handling less than significant quantities of fissionable materials need 
not be certified.  Any additional positions requiring certification must be 
identified based on the graded approach. 
c. Evaluations for certification must meet all requirements for qualification plus an 
oral exam.

--- page 7 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-I-4 08-05-2026 
14. MEDICAL EXAMINATION. 
a. Qualified personnel may be required to complete a medical examination, as 
applicable to the position. 
b. Certified personnel must complete a medical examination to verify fitness 
for duty and receive periodic medical reexamination at an interval not to 
exceed 5 years based on job responsibilities, facility hazards, and 
applicable requirements. 
c. Medical clearance may be required before return to duties following illness/injury 
or other debilitating factor. 
15. EVALUATIONS. 
a. Evaluations must sample knowledge and performance derived from approved 
learning objectives. 
b. Oral evaluations must demonstrate job-specific actions and may be conducted 
as a one-on-one walkthrough (potentially during the operational evaluation) 
or by an oral board empaneled by facility managers and knowledgeable and/or 
qualified personnel. 
c. Simulation-based operational evaluations may be used to support qualifications 
for emergency response actions or when facility conditions do not permit actual 
operation of processes or components. 
d. Certified positions must include: 
(1) A comprehensive evaluation containing representative questions derived 
from approved learning objectives. 
(2) An oral evaluation (one-on-one or oral board) tailored to evaluate 
operational knowledge and organizational awareness under normal and 
abnormal conditions. 
16. TRAINING EXCEPTIONS. 
a. The contractor must establish a procedure for granting and documenting 
individual exceptions to training and qualification program requirements. 
17. CONTINUING TRAINING. 
a. The contractor must establish continuing training programs using a graded 
approach commensurate with facility hazards and activity risk. 
b. Continuing training cycles may not exceed 5 years.

--- page 8 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-I-5 
18. OPERATIONAL DRILLS. 
a. The contractor must conduct periodic operational drills sufficient to demonstrate 
response to abnormal and accident conditions. 
b. Operational drills must be commensurate with facility hazards, complexity, and 
credible accident scenarios. 
c. Operational drills must be documented in the training and qualification program. 
d. Operational drills may be conducted in conjunction with emergency 
management drills required by DOE O 151.1E, Comprehensive Emergency 
Management System. 
19. REQUALIFICATION/RECERTIFICATION. 
a. The contractor must define the periodicity for requalification/recertification not to 
exceed 5 years.  Criteria for requalification/recertification requirements must be 
determined by position and based on the impact to the facility safety basis. 
b. If requalification/recertification requirements are not completed by the established 
due date, personnel must not continue performing assigned duties unless directly 
supervised by a qualified person, or an approved extension is in place. 
c. The contractor must provide a comprehensive recertification evaluation for 
certified positions and may do so for qualified positions. 
d. Periodic evaluations or proof of proficiency may be implemented in lieu of a 
comprehensive requalification evaluation and must not conflict with other 
applicable regulatory standards. 
e. Personnel must be considered for removal from duties under the following 
conditions until competence is reestablished: 
(1) Requalification/recertification evaluation failure 
(2) Performance deficiencies affecting safe operations 
(3) Lapse in recurring required qualification/certification element(s). 
f. Reinstatement may be granted after remedial actions and satisfactory 
reevaluation(s) are completed and documented. 
20. REMEDIATION. 
a. Remediation processes must be established to ensure any identified performance 
or knowledge gaps are corrected in a timely manner.

--- page 9 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter I – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-I-6 08-05-2026 
21. ABSENCES. 
a. The contractor must establish and implement an absence-from-duty program that 
considers time away and the effect on safety basis performance by position. 
b. Criteria and thresholds for reevaluation must be established and documented after 
extended absence. 
22. EXTENSIONS. 
a. The contractor may grant extensions to requalification/recertification on a case-
by-case basis by individual or by job position based on circumstances. 
b. Extensions must document justification and a total duration not to exceed 1 year. 
c. Extensions must not conflict with other applicable regulatory standards. 
23. PROFICIENCY. 
a. Proficiency requirements must be established and documented for certified 
positions and may be established for qualified positions. 
b. If proficiency lapses, qualification/certification status must be suspended and may 
be reinstated after satisfactory remedial actions are performed. 
c. Reinstatement documentation should include, as applicable: 
(1) Continuing training topics missed. 
(2) Required reading. 
(3) Applicable procedure updates/revisions. 
(4) Changes in systems/processes. 
(5) Supervised duty performance for a prescribed period. 
(6) Examinations/evaluations. 
d. If operations are too infrequent to meet proficiency requirements, the contractor 
must reinstate qualification/certification prior to operation using one or more 
defined methods (e.g., written/oral exam, operational evaluation, walkthrough, 
simulated operations). 
24. TRAINING DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS. 
a. Contractor must have a training document and records process and program 
appropriate to the technical complexity, risks, and hazards of the facility as 
documented in the facility safety basis.  Records must comply with applicable 
federal records and privacy requirements.

--- page 10 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter I – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-I-7 
b. Contractors must maintain auditable documents and records, as applicable to the 
position and required training program elements. 
(1) Personnel selection. 
(2) Qualification/certification. 
(3) Examinations and evaluations. 
(4) Continuing training. 
(5) Exceptions and extensions.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter II – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-II-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1, CHAPTER II 
SPECIFIC TRAINING REQUIREMENTS, HAZARD CATEGORY 1, 2, AND 3 
NONREACTOR AND REACTOR NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. OPERATORS AND OPERATIONS SUPERVISOR. 
a. Operator training must include fundamentals derived from position analysis as 
applicable to assigned duties. 
b. Operator training must include classroom and/or on-the-job training (OTJ) on the 
following topics, covering, as applicable to the position: 
(1) Facility systems (normal/abnormal/emergency), including instrumentation, 
interlocks, failure modes, interfaces, and automatic/manual features. 
(2) Principles of operation and technical terminology relevant to facility 
processes. 
(3) Normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures. 
(4) Emergency systems (components, functions, limitations). 
(5) Criticality safety principles, controls, and specifications (as applicable). 
(6) Radiation control practices. 
(7) Safety basis fundamentals. 
(8) Conduct of operations. 
c. Operations supervisor programs should address the same content categories as 
operators and provide greater depth as appropriate to supervisory responsibilities. 
d. Initial qualification for operators and operations supervisors must include a 
comprehensive evaluation. 
e. For positions requiring certification, initial certification must require completion 
of qualification and a formal oral examination. 
f. The contractor must establish requalification/recertification periodicity for 
operators and operations supervisors not to exceed 5 years. 
2. TECHNICIANS AND MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL. 
a. Technicians and maintenance personnel must be qualified to perform the task or 
tasks associated with their specialty or work under the direct supervision of 
personnel qualified to perform the activity or task.

--- page 12 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-II-2 08-05-2026 
b. Technicians and maintenance personnel whose work involves engineered safety 
features must be trained and evaluated on the importance of safety significant and 
safety class structures, systems, and components. 
2. MANAGERS. 
a. Managers may be considered qualified based on meeting personnel selection 
criteria and assignment to the management role. 
b. Managers with nuclear facility safety responsibilities must complete facility-
specific training, commensurate with assigned responsibilities. 
3. TECHNICAL SUPPORT PERSONNEL. 
a. Technical personnel assigned to perform support in a nuclear facility must possess 
education/experience consistent with job expectations and appropriate to hazards 
and risks documented in the facility safety basis. 
b. Technical personnel must complete safety basis training and any evaluations 
commensurate to the position. 
4. HAZARD CATEGORY 1/CATEGORY A REACTOR.  This section provides additional 
position-specific training requirements for Hazard Category 1/Category A reactor 
personnel. 
a. Engineering Expertise On-Shift Requirements.  Safe operation demands the 
operating shift possess adequate operational and accident management expertise.  
This demand may be satisfied by designating a Shift Technical Advisor (STA) for 
each shift, or by combining the STA position with the shift supervisor or an on-
shift Senior Reactor Operator (SRO).  If the combined approach is utilized, the 
designated STA must consider the following qualifications: 
(1) Currently certified as an SRO. 
(2) Successful completion of STA training requirements in paragraph 3.c. 
(3) One of the following educational requirements: 
(a) Baccalaureate in engineering. 
(b) Professional Engineer’s license, 
(c) Baccalaureate in engineering technology, with course work in the 
physical, mathematical, or engineering sciences. 
(d) Baccalaureate in a physical, mathematical, or engineering science, 
with course work in engineering technology. 
b. Simulator Requirements.  The need for a full-scope or part-task simulator for 
DOE test and research reactors may be based on an evaluation conducted by the 
operating organization.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter II – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-II-3 
c. Shift Technical Advisor.  Contractor must determine STA training.  STA training 
must include: 
(1) Postulated accidents analyzed in the facility DSA and the potential 
consequences of these accidents. 
(2) Response to an analysis of facility transients and accidents. 
d. Reactor Operators (ROs).  Contractor must develop an RO training program that 
includes an operational evaluation.  RO training must include: 
(1) Procedures and TSRs including normal, abnormal, emergency, and 
administrative procedures; and operational limitations. 
(2) Use of installed facility systems for the control and mitigation of an 
accident in which the core may be severely damaged. 
e. Senior Reactor Operators.  Contractor must develop an SRO training program that 
includes an operational evaluation.  SRO training must include: 
(1) Operating limitations in the TSRs and their bases. 
(2) Assessment of facility conditions and selection of appropriate procedures 
during normal, abnormal, and emergency situations. 
(3) Conditions and limitations for facility operations. 
f. Operating Crew/Shift Training. 
(1) Reactor operator candidates must: (i) be assigned to an operating crew 
full-time for a minimum of 3 months’ shift training, with no concurrent 
duties unrelated to facility operations, and (ii) during this period, under 
the observation and control of a certified reactor operator, manipulate 
the facility controls and perform the same duties as a certified 
reactor operator. 
(2) SRO candidates must: (i) be assigned to an operating crew full-time for a 
minimum of 3 months’ shift training with no concurrent duties unrelated 
to facility operations, and (ii) during this period, under the observation and 
control of a certified SRO, supervise the manipulation of the facility 
controls and perform the same duties as a certified SRO. 
g. Control Manipulation Requirements for Certified Positions. 
(1) The list of control manipulations for certified positions is based on a SAT 
analysis for these positions.  This list (i) specifies which manipulations are 
to be performed annually and which are to be performed periodically as 
defined by the contractor not to exceed 5 years, and (ii) identifies any 
control manipulations that may affect reactivity.

--- page 14 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-II-4 08-05-2026 
5. CATEGORY B REACTOR. 
a. Fuel Handling Operations.  All fuel handling operations must be performed by or 
under the direct supervision of a person certified to perform such operations.  
Supporting requirements: (1) establish a specific training and qualification 
program (initial and continued) to certify fuel handling operators and supervisors 
for their assigned tasks, and (2) administer written evaluations.  Training and 
evaluations may be limited to that needed for fuel handling safety, the impact of 
fuel handling on safety, and actions to be taken during abnormal and 
emergency conditions. 
The requirements above do not apply if fuel handling is performed by reactor 
operators and SROs trained for fuel handling. 
b. Reactor Operators.  Training for ROs may consider the previous experience, 
training, and level of responsibility of the candidate.  The qualification program 
may include both classroom-type and on-the-job training to assure familiarity 
with all required aspects of reactor operation, including anticipated transients and 
accident conditions.  Where construction precludes OTJ training, practical 
experience at similar reactors, training on simulators, and other appropriate 
training may be accepted.  Training must include information from the following 
as applicable: 
(1) Facility design and operating characteristics, including facility design 
features, design and operating characteristics and limitations, safety and 
emergency systems, experiment and test facilities, engineered safety 
features, and shielding. 
(2) An understanding of the DSA, TSRs, system description manuals, and 
operating procedures. 
(3) Principles of facility operation, including principles of reactor operation, 
radiological protection, effects of experiments, basic reactor theory, heat 
transfer, fluid flow, and thermodynamics, as necessary, for the specific 
design of the reactor. 
(4) Instrumentation and control, including nuclear instruments, process 
instruments, control systems, radiation monitoring systems and survey 
equipment, experiment and test facility instrumentation, and manipulation 
of reactivity controls. 
(5) Procedures and TSRs, including normal, abnormal, emergency, 
radiological and hazardous materials control and administrative 
procedures, and operational limitations. 
(6) Written evaluations based on the above learning objectives and 
developed from an analysis of the job must be administered to reactor 
operator candidates.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 1, Chap ter II – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-II-5 
c. Senior Reactor Operators.  Training for SROs may consider the previous 
experience, training, and level of responsibility of the candidate.  Training must 
include information from the following as applicable: radioactive materials 
handling, including special nuclear material and radioactive materials hazards, 
handling, disposal, and safe practices. 
(1) Information in the DSA, TSRs, system description manuals, and operating 
procedures, and lessons learned from occurrence reports. 
(2) Advanced theory and operation, including reactivity effects during 
experimental and maintenance activities, fuel handling, fuel burnup and 
reactivity worth; alterations in core configuration; TSRs and their 
technical bases; and administrative responsibilities for an SRO’s level 
of responsibility. 
(3) Written evaluations based on the above learning objectives developed 
from an analysis of the job must be administered to SRO candidates. 
d. Control Manipulation Requirements for Certified Positions.  (See Chapter III, 
Section 3.) 
e. Medical Examination Requirements.  For Hazard Category 2/Category B reactors, 
the contractor must comply with 10 CFR § 851, Worker Safety and Health 
Program, Appendix A, Section 8, Occupational Medicine.  Medical personnel are 
encouraged to use the medical examination criteria and procedures in ANSI/ANS 
15.4-2016, Selection and Training of Personnel for Research Reactors. 
6. REACTOR FACILITY PROFICIENCY. 
General proficiency requirements are provided in Chapter 1, Section 24.  The following 
are the minimum duty times to maintain proficiency for ROs and SROs: 
a. Hazard Category 1/Category A Reactors: as determined by the contractor no less 
than 12 hours per quarter, in blocks of time no less than four hours. 
b. Category B Reactors: to maintain active status, perform certification duties for at 
least four hours per quarter. 
c. If proficiency is not maintained, the person may not be assigned duties.  Prior to 
restoring an employee to duty following loss of active status, the contractor may 
evaluate and document the following factors: 
(1) Continuing training topics missed (if any). 
(2) Required reading applicable to the position. 
(3) Changes in facility systems/processes.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 1, Chapter II – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 426.2B 
Page 1-II-6 08-05-2026 
(4) Performance of duties under the direct supervision of a person qualified in 
that position for a prescribed period in accordance with section d below. 
(5) Written and oral evaluations and performance evaluations as 
deemed necessary. 
d. If proficiency is not maintained, Certified ROs and SROs must: 
(1) Perform certification duties under the direct supervision of a person 
certified in that position for a minimum period of time, as stated below; 
(2) Tour the facility; and 
(3) Review shift turnover procedures. 
(4) The minimum required performance times for certified duties are: 
(a) Hazard Category 1/Category A reactor-certified ROs and SROs: 
12 hours (in blocks of no less than four hours). 
(b) Category B reactor-certified ROs and SROs: six hours.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 2 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
REFERENCES 
This Attachment provides information associated with DOE O 426.2A as well as information 
applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD (Attachment 1 to DOE O 426.2A) 
is inserted. 
1. Codes of Federal Regulations. 
a. 10 CFR § 55, Operators’ Licenses 
b. 10 CFR § 70, Domestic Licensing of Special Nuclear Material 
c. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management 
d. 10 CFR § 835, Occupational Radiation Protection 
e. 10 CFR § 850, Chronic Beryllium Disease Prevention Program 
f. 10 CFR § 851, Worker Safety and Health Program 
g. 10 CFR § 1008, Records Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act) 
2. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association. 
a. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association, TG15 (1998), 
“Management of Electronic Records” 
b. Nuclear Information and Records Management Association, TG21-2001, 
“Required Records Protection, Disaster Recovery and Business Continuation” 
3. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
a. Regulatory Guide 1.134, “Medical Assessment of Licensed Operators or 
Applicants for Operator Licenses at Nuclear Power Plants” 
b. Regulatory Guide 1.149, “Nuclear Power Plant Simulation Facilities for Use in 
Operator Training, License Examinations, and Applicant Experience 
Requirements,” Rev. 4 (2011) 
c. Regulatory Guide 1.8, “Qualification and Training of Personnel for Nuclear 
Power Plants,” Rev. 3 (2000) 
4. American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear Society (ANS) 
Standard (STD). 
a. ANSI/ANS 3.1-2014, “Selection, Qualification, and Training of Personnel for 
Nuclear Power Plants”

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2B 
Page 2-2 08-05-2026 
b. ANSI/ANS 3.4-2013, “Medical Certification and Monitoring of Personnel 
Requiring Operator Licenses for Nuclear Power Plants” 
c. ANSI/ANS 3.5-2009, “Nuclear Power Plant Simulators for Operator Training and 
Examination” 
d. ANSI/ANS 8.1-2014, “Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable 
Materials Outside Reactors” 
e. ANSI/ANS 8.15-2014, “Nuclear Criticality Control of Special Actinide Nuclides” 
f. ANSI/ANS 8.20-1991, “Nuclear Criticality Safety Training” (Reaffirmed 2015) 
g. ANSI/ANS 15.4-2016, “Selection and Training of Personnel for Research 
Reactors” 
5. DOE Orders (O) and Manuals (M). 
a. DOE O 151.1, Comprehensive Emergency Management System, current version 
b. DOE O 206.1, Department of Energy Privacy Program, current version 
c. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version 
d. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version 
e. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version 
f. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version 
g. DOE O 425.1, Verification of Readiness to Startup or Restart Nuclear Facilities, 
current version 
h. DOE O 440.1, Worker Protection Program for DOE (including the National 
Nuclear Security Administration) Federal Employees, current version 
i. DOE O 460.1, Hazardous Material Packaging and Transportation Safety, 
current version 
6. DOE Handbooks (HDBK) and Technical Standards (STD). 
a. DOE-STD-1070-94, Criteria for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training 
Programs (Reaffirmed 2014) 
b. DOE-HDBK-1078-94, Training Program Handbook: A Systematic Approach to 
Training (R: 2014) 
c. DOE-HDBK-1211-2014, Activity-Level Work Planning and 
Control Implementation 
d. DOE-STD-1098-2017, Radiological Control

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-3 
e. DOE-HDBK-1204-97, Guide to Good Practices for the Development of 
Test Items 
f. DOE-HDBK-1205-97, Guide to Good Practices for Design, Development, and 
Implementation of Examinations 
g. DOE-HDBK-1206-98, Guide to Good Practices for On-The-Job Training 
h. DOE-HDBK-1078-94, Training Program Handbook: A Systematic Approach 
to Training 
7. Other. 
a. “Department of Energy Implementation Plan for Defense Nuclear Facilities 
Safety Board Recommendation 2011-1,” December 27, 2011 
b. Other training resources are available at the National Training Center Training 
Library (https://sites.ntc.doe.gov/partners/tr/SitePages/Home.aspx) and in DOE’s 
Technical Standards archives.

--- page 20 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
DEFINITIONS 
This Attachment provides information associated with Department of Energy (DOE) Order 
(O) 426.2B as well as information applicable to contracts in which the associated Contractor 
Requirements Document (CRD; Attachment 1 to DOE O 426.2B) is inserted. 
1. Category A Reactor Facilities.  Those production, test, and research reactors designated 
by DOE based on power level, potential fission product inventory, and experimental 
capability.  Category A reactors are Hazard Category 1 nuclear facilities. 
2. Category B Reactor Facilities.  Those test and research reactors designated by DOE 
based on power level, potential fission product inventory, and experimental capability.  
Category B reactors are Hazard Category 2 nuclear facilities. 
3. Certification.  The process by which contractor management endorses and documents, in 
writing, the satisfactory achievement of qualification by a person for a position 
designated for certification.  Certification follows the completion of the qualification 
program for those positions identified as requiring certification.  The notable differences 
between initial certification and qualification are: (a) requirements for an oral evaluation 
or board, and (b) certification requires official contractor management endorsement, 
outside of the individual’s direct supervisor, of their qualification to ensure senior 
management involvement in the qualification of designated operations positions (i.e., 
operators and supervisors). 
4. Certified Personnel.  Persons who have current certification in accordance with 
this Order. 
5. Classroom Training.  May include lectures, seminars, table-top exercises, computer-
based training, or structured self-study activities. 
6. Controls.  When used with respect to nuclear reactors, apparatus and mechanisms that, 
when manipulated, directly affect the reactivity or power level of a reactor or the status of 
an engineered safety feature. 
7. Direct Supervision.  Continuous, in-person oversight by a qualified individual whose 
immediate responsibility is the supervision of personnel and who is positioned and 
authorized to intervene to prevent unsafe or irreversible actions.  The supervising 
individual must be capable of promptly taking control of the activity to ensure protection 
of the facility, workers, the public, and the environment. 
8. Documented Safety Analysis (DSA).  A documented analysis of the extent to which 
a nuclear facility can be operated safely with respect to workers, the public, and 
the environment, including a description of the conditions, safe boundaries, and 
hazard controls that provide the basis for ensuring safety.  (10 CFR § 830, Nuclear 
Safety Management). 
9. Education.  The successful completion of the requirements established by an accredited 
educational institution.

--- page 21 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2B 
Page 3-2 08-05-2026 
10. Engineered Safety Features.  Structures, systems, or components that prevent and/or 
mitigate the consequences of potential accidents described in the DSA. 
11. Evaluation.  The process of assessing the effectiveness of an individual’s performance 
based on established learning objectives defined for the knowledge, skills and abilities of 
the position.  Types of evaluation may include performance demonstration, examination, 
operational evaluation, oral exam, oral board, walkthrough or any combination thereof. 
12. Exception.  As used in this Order, a release of an individual from portions of a training 
and qualification program through prior education, experience, testing, evaluation of 
work products, and training. 
13. Exemption.  A formal and final release from a provision in a DOE Order, Notice, or 
Manual included in the contract; or from one or more requirements in a Regulation.  (See 
DOE O 410.1, Central Technical Authority Responsibilities Regarding Nuclear Safety 
Requirements, current version.) 
14. Fissionable Materials.  A nuclide capable of sustaining a neutron-induced fission chain 
reaction.  Nuclides such as uranium-233, uranium-235, plutonium-238, plutonium-239, 
plutonium-241, neptunium-237, americium-241, and curium-244. 
15. Fissionable Materials Handler.  A person certified by contractor facility management to 
manipulate or handle significant quantities of fissionable materials or manipulate the 
controls of equipment used to produce, process, transfer, store, or package significant 
quantities of such materials. 
16. Full-Scope Simulator.  A simulator incorporating detailed modeling of systems of the 
reference facility with which the operator interfaces in the control room environment.  
The control area operating consoles are included.  Such a simulator demonstrates 
expected facility response to normal and abnormal conditions. 
17. Graded Approach.  The process to ensure a risk-informed approach considering the level 
of analysis, documentation, and actions used to comply with a requirement are 
commensurate with: (a) the relative importance to safety, safeguards, and security; (b) the 
magnitude of any hazard involved; (c) the life-cycle stage of a facility; (d) the 
programmatic mission of the facility; (e) the particular characteristics of a facility; (f) the 
relative importance of radiological and nonradiological hazards; and (g) any other 
relevant factors (10 CFR § 830).  Proper use of a systematic approach to training (SAT) 
ensures the application of the graded approach. 
18. Hazard Category.  The calculated consequences of postulated unmitigated releases of 
radioactive and/or hazardous material evaluated as required by 10 CFR § 830 and 
classified by the following hazard categories: 
a. Category 1: The hazard analysis shows the potential for significant 
offsite consequences. 
b. Category 2: The hazard analysis shows the potential for significant 
onsite consequences.

--- page 22 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-3 
c. Category 3: The hazard analysis shows the potential for only significant 
localized consequences. 
19. Job Analysis.  A systematic method used in obtaining a detailed listing of the tasks of a 
specific job. 
20. Maintenance Personnel.  Persons responsible for performing maintenance on engineered 
safety features and support systems as identified in the DSA (this would include 
personnel responsible for planning and preparing the work packages associated 
with maintenance). 
21. Manager.  A person whose assigned responsibilities include one or more of the following: 
nuclear safety, operational efficiency and reliability, control of reactor or nonreactor 
nuclear facility emergencies, and any other activities necessary to safeguard the reactor 
and nonreactor facilities. 
22. Medical Examination.  An examination performed by a licensed physician or performed 
by physician’s assistant that is subsequently reviewed and approved by a licensed 
physician, to determine the physical condition and general health of a person for duty. 
23. Must and May.  (a) Must is used to denote a requirement; (b) may is used to denote 
permission or recommendation. 
24. Nonreactor Nuclear Facility.  Those facilities, activities, or operations that involve or will 
involve radioactive and/or fissionable materials in such form and quantity that a nuclear 
or a nuclear explosive hazard potentially exists to workers, the public, or the 
environment, but does not include accelerators and their operations and does not include 
activities involving only incidental use and generation of radioactive materials or 
radiation, such as check and calibration sources; use of radioactive sources in research, 
experimental, and analytical laboratory activities; electron microscopes; and X-ray 
machines (10 CFR § 830). 
25. Nuclear Experience.  When used in reference to Hazard Category 1/Category A and 
Category B Reactors, experience acquired at commercial, production, training, test, 
military, or research reactors, including experience acquired in reactor facility startup 
activities or operation.  Experience in design, construction, maintenance, or related 
technical services that are job-related may also be considered.  Appropriate research, 
teaching, or both may be counted as nuclear experience.  When used in reference to 
nonreactor nuclear facilities, also includes experience acquired at any facility in which 
radioactive materials are routinely handled, stored, processed, or utilized.  Nuclear 
power plant experience is experience acquired in the testing, operation, or maintenance 
of nuclear or other power-generating facilities.  Experience in design and construction 
may be considered applicable power plant experience and may be evaluated on a 
case-by-case basis. 
26. Nuclear Facility.  A reactor or nonreactor facility, classified as Hazard Category 1, 2, or 
3, where an activity is conducted for or on behalf of DOE and includes any related area, 
structure, facility, or activity to the extent necessary to ensure proper implementation of 
the requirements established in 10 CFR § 830.

--- page 23 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2B 
Page 3-4 08-05-2026 
27. Operators.  Persons responsible for performing operations associated with engineered 
safety features as identified in the DSA, operating support systems which could affect 
engineered safety features, or conducting activities with special nuclear material.  Duties 
may include manipulating facility controls, monitoring parameters, and operating facility 
equipment.  Operators include reactor operators, fissionable material handlers, tritium 
facility operators, chemical process operators, waste tank operators, and enrichment 
facility operators. 
28. Operating Organization.  The contractor organization responsible for facility operation, 
maintenance, and technical support services related to DOE nuclear facility operations. 
29. Operational Drill.  A drill conducted in the facility that exercises process/facility 
equipment, procedures, and level of knowledge for qualified/certified positions.  These 
activities are also intended to demonstrate knowledge of operational procedures during 
abnormal conditions. 
30. Operational Evaluation.  A documented evaluation of an individual’s knowledge and 
skills for a position requiring qualification/certification.  The operational evaluation is a 
facility walkthrough evaluation conducted for qualification/certification that may include 
system and/or component operation or simulation of operations, during which the 
candidate is observed and questioned regarding procedures, safety implications, system 
knowledge, and operational safety requirements, as applicable. 
31. Participation.  Taking an active role in the duties and responsibilities relative to the 
function for which the candidate/trainee is being considered.  Simple observation is not 
considered participation. 
32. Performance Demonstration.  A documented evaluation of an individual’s knowledge and 
skills for a position requiring only qualification.  The intent of the process is similar to 
that of an operational evaluation, but tailored to more limited job requirements.  (See 
definition of operational evaluation.) 
33. Performance Evaluation.  A generic term used to describe when one’s performance is 
being evaluated to determine whether the evaluated person possesses the knowledge and 
skills required to perform identified jobs, tasks, or processes. 
34. Practical Factors.  Discrete tasks identified in the design phase and performed using 
approved procedures, administrative guides, and common practices while under the 
instruction of a qualified operator, supervisor, or manager.  May also be accomplished 
performing the duties of the qualified position. 
35. Proficiency.  Active participation in job functions associated with the position (whether 
qualified and/or certified) for a specified amount of hours per month or quarter, as 
specified in facility procedures. 
36. Provisional Qualification.  Temporary authorization for individuals who have met initial 
criteria but require further evaluation before achieving full qualification.  This status 
permits operation under defined conditions while additional tests, assessments, or training 
are completed.  It may also allow operation equivalent to full qualification when 
appropriate compensatory measures are in place.

--- page 24 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-5 
37. Qualification.  The process for attaining, demonstrating, and documenting the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities identified for a position by the SAT process.  It includes education, 
experience, classroom and on-the-job training, evaluation, and any special requirements 
necessary to perform assigned responsibilities for a given position. 
38. Reactor.  A device used to initiate and control a sustained nuclear chain reaction. 
39. Reactor Operator.  A person certified by contractor nuclear facility line or program 
management to operate (manipulate the controls of) a DOE-owned reactor. 
40. Remediation.  Training designed to correct a deficiency when training results in a less 
than adequate or failed outcome, satisfy completion of a reexamination, and/or provide 
proof of completion for a missing training requirement. 
41. Safety Analysis.  A documented process: (a) to provide systematic identification of 
hazards within a given DOE operation; (b) to describe and analyze the adequacy of 
measures taken to eliminate, control, or mitigate identified hazards; and (c) to analyze 
and evaluate potential accidents and their associated risks. 
42. Safety Basis.  The DSA and hazard controls that provide reasonable assurance the DOE 
nuclear facility can be operated safely in a manner that adequately protects workers, the 
public, and the environment (10 CFR 830). 
43. Senior Reactor Operator.  A person certified by contractor nuclear facility line or 
program management to operate and direct the operation of a DOE-owned reactor. 
44. Shift Supervisor.  A person qualified or certified by the operating organization and 
designated by contractor facility management to directly supervise operations, 
operational activities, and operations-related activities of personnel at DOE-owned 
reactor and nonreactor nuclear facilities.  Substitute titles may be used for positions of 
equivalent functions. 
45. Shift Technical Advisor.  A person who has been assigned to provide on-shift advice and 
counsel to shift operating personnel during shift activities and to help determine cause 
and mitigation of facility accidents. 
46. Significant Quantity of Fissionable Materials.  The minimum quantity of fissionable 
material in designated form for which control is required to maintain subcriticality under 
all normal and credible abnormal conditions.  The single parameter limits for fissionable 
materials are listed in ANSI/ANS-8.1-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with 
Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors, and ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality 
Control of Special Actinide Elements.  These standards require that limits be adjusted 
where process conditions could credibly involve moderators or reflectors that are more 
effective than light water.

--- page 25 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 426.2B 
Page 3-6 08-05-2026 
47. Supervisors.  Individuals who are responsible for the quantity and quality of work 
performed and who direct the actions of operators, fissionable material handlers, 
technicians, or maintenance personnel.  Supervisory positions typically include shift 
operations manager (or shift manager), reactor supervisors, fissionable material handler 
supervisors, tritium operator supervisors, chemical process operator supervisors, waste 
tank operator supervisors, maintenance supervisors, technician supervisors, and technical 
support supervisors.  Their duties include ensuring work is performed in compliance with 
procedures, policies, and industrial safety practices. 
48. Systematic Approach to Training.  Any logical process for identifying and acquiring the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities required to safely perform the duties of a specific 
position.  It includes the following elements: 
a. An analysis of the jobs to be performed 
b. Design of learning objectives derived from the analysis of the job that describe 
desired performance after training 
c. Development of lesson plans and other training materials 
d. Implementation of the developed training 
e. Evaluation of trainee mastery of the objectives during training 
f. Evaluation and revision of the training based on the performance of trained 
personnel in the job setting. 
49. Task.  A well-defined unit of work having an identifiable beginning and end, which is a 
measurable component of the duties and responsibilities of a specific job. 
50. Technical Personnel.  Persons responsible for supervision, design, evaluation, 
modification, testing, and performance of technical support functions for the operating 
organization.  Technical personnel typically have expertise in mechanical, electrical, 
instrumentation and control, chemistry, radiation protection, safety, quality 
assurance/independent assessment, software quality assurance, facility engineering, 
system/process engineering, safety basis engineering, criticality safety, or nuclear safety.  
(Examples of technical personnel responsibilities include: surveillance and testing related 
to normal facility operation and operation of safety-related systems; analyzing routine 
operational/facility data; planning modifications to facility safety systems; providing 
technical assistance during normal, abnormal, and emergency facility conditions to offer 
technical problem resolution to operations in their area of expertise; providing 
engineering/technical assistance in support functions to the facility such as radiological, 
quality assurance, and for initial design or modifications that impact nuclear safety.) 
51. Technical Safety Requirements.  The limits, controls, and related actions that establish 
the specific parameters and requisite actions for the safe operation of a nuclear facility 
and include, as appropriate for the work and hazards identified in the DSA for the 
facility: safety limits, operating limits, surveillance requirements, administrative and 
management controls, use and application provisions, and design features, as well as a 
bases appendix (10 CFR 830).

--- page 26 ---
DOE O 426.2B Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 3-7 
52. Technicians.  Persons principally involved in calibration, inspection, troubleshooting, 
testing, maintenance, and radiation protection activities.  Examples are laboratory 
technicians, instrument technicians, industrial hygiene, environmental, quality control, 
decontamination and decommissioning technicians, and radiological control technicians. 
53. Training.  Instruction designed for acquisition of knowledge, skills, and abilities to 
develop or improve job performance. 
54. Training Implementation Document.  A document prepared by the contractor to identify 
those sections of this CRD that are applicable to a particular facility.  The document 
defines and describes the application of personnel selection, qualification, certification, 
and training requirements identified in this CRD.  It must clearly define the organization, 
planning, and administration of the program and set forth the responsibility, authority, 
and methods for conducting training.  Suitable justification must be included in the 
document for CRD provisions that are not implemented.  At sites with several facilities, a 
combined training document may be submitted. 
55. Training Organization.  The entity responsible for supporting the line organization to 
identify, meet, and monitor training needs in support of the facility mission.  The training 
organization assists line organizations in performing the SAT.  The training organization 
may include a training manager, instructional technologists, and instructors. 
56. Training and Qualification Program.  A planned, organized sequence of activities 
designed to prepare individuals to perform their jobs, to meet a specific position or 
classification need, and to maintain or improve their performance on the job. 
57. Unescorted Facility Access Training.  The training required to allow persons to have 
unescorted access to reactor and nonreactor nuclear facilities.  UFAT supersedes general 
employee training.
