--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLEONLINE AT:   INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov    Office of Human Environment, Safety, Health, and Security 
 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER  
 Washington, DC 
 
Approved: 02-11-2011 
Chg 1 (AdminChg): 03-08-2011 
Chg 2 (AdminChg): 06-06-2011 
Chg 3 (AdminChg): 1-15-2013 
Chg 4 (LtdChg): 9-15-2020 
Chg 5 (AdminChg): 01-30-2025 
 
SUBJECT: RADIATION PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
1. PURPOSE. 
a. To establish requirements to protect the public and the environment against undue 
risk from radiation associated with radiological activities conducted under the 
control of the Department of Energy (DOE) pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 
1954, as amended (AEA). 
b. The objectives of this Order are: 
(1) To conduct DOE radiological activities so that exposure to members of the 
public is maintained within the dose limits established in this Order; 
(2) To control the radiological clearance of DOE real and personal property; 
(3) To ensure that potential radiation exposures to members of the public are 
as low as is reasonably achievable; 
(4) To ensure that DOE sites have the capabilities, consistent with the types of 
radiological activities conducted, to monitor routine and non-routine 
radiological releases and to assess the radiation dose to members of the 
public; and 
(5) To provide protection of the environment from the effects of radiation and 
radioactive material. 
2. CANCELLATION. DOE Order 458.1 Chg 4 (LtdChg), Radiation Protection of the 
Public and the Environment, dated 9-15-2020. Cancellation of a directive, does not, by 
itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with 
the directive. Contractor Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated 
into a contract remain in effect unless and until the contract is modified to either 
eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or substitute a new set of 
requirements.
DOE O 458.1

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
3. APPLICABILITY.  
a. Departmental Applicability.  
(1) This Order applies to all Departmental elements that are responsible for, or 
provide support for, the management and operation of DOE sites 
conducting radiological activities or management of DOE radioactive 
material or property that can result in exposures of the public to radiation 
or radioactive material. 
(2) The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA) must assure that NNSA employees and contractors comply with 
their respective responsibilities under this Directive. Nothing in this Order 
will be construed to interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority 
under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
b. DOE Contractors. 
(1) Except for the equivalencies/exclusions in paragraph 3.c., the Contractor 
Requirements Document (CRD) sets forth requirements of this Order that 
will apply to contracts that include the CRD. 
(2) The CRD must be included in contracts under which the contractor 
manages or conducts radiological activities at DOE sites. 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 458.1. Equivalencies and Exemptions are 
granted consistent with the provisions of DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives 
Program, current version. Central Technical Authority (or designee) concurrence 
is required for both exemptions and equivalencies to this Order for nuclear 
facilities. 
(1) Equivalency. Activities regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
(NRC) or regulated by an NRC Agreement State under NRC AEA 
delegated authorities. 
(2) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, codified at 50 USC sections 2406 and 
2511, and to ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval 
Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval 
Reactors (Director) will implement and oversee requirements and 
practices pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director’s 
cognizance, as deemed appropriate.  
(3) Exemption. This Order does not apply to the Bonneville Power 
Administration (BPA), in accordance with Secretarial Delegation Order

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 458.1 3 
2-11-2011  
 
 
Number 00-033.00B to the BPA Administrator and Chief Executive 
Officer, dated 7-20-09.  
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Environmental Radiological Protection Program. 
(1) DOE must ensure that:  
(a) DOE or DOE contractors operating sites or implementing projects, 
involving radiological activities that can affect the public or 
environment, establish and maintain a program that complies with 
applicable requirements of this Order. 
(b) The program, which is the composite of plans, procedures, 
protocols and other documents describing the methods used to 
achieve compliance, must be tailored to the hazard or risk and 
particular radiological activities being conducted at the site and 
relevant requirements of this Order. 
(c) For any determination that a requirement of this Order is not 
relevant, the basis for that determination is appropriate to the 
hazard and adequately documented. 
(2) DOE must document directions to the contractor necessary to correct any 
potential inadequacies or inappropriate determinations of relevancy.  
(3) DOE must ensure that long-term stewardship and institutional controls for 
protection of the public and environment determined necessary to meet the 
requirements of this Order are adequately documented and implemented 
as long as is necessary. 
b. Public Dose Limit. 
(1) DOE radiological activities, including remedial actions and activities 
using Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive 
Material (TENORM), must be conducted so that exposure of members of 
the public to ionizing radiation will:  
(a) Not cause a total effective dose (TED) exceeding 100 mrem 
(1mSv) in a year, an equivalent dose to the lens of the eye 
exceeding 1500 mrem (15 mSv) in a year, or an equivalent dose to 
the skin or extremities exceeding 5000 mrem (50 mSv) in a year, 
from all sources of ionizing radiation and exposure pathways that 
could contribute significantly to the total dose excepting: 
1 Dose from radon and its decay products in air [Radon is 
regulated separately e.g., under Paragraphs 4.f. and

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
4.h.(1)(d) in this Order and under Title 40 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 61, Subparts Q and T]; 
2 Dose received by patients from medical sources of 
radiation, and by volunteers in medical research programs;  
3 Dose from background radiation;  
4 Dose from occupational exposure under NRC or 
Agreement State license or to general employees regulated 
under 10 CFR Part 835, and  
(b) Comply with As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) 
requirements in paragraph 4.d. of this Order. 
(2) The public dose limit applies to members of the public located off DOE 
sites and on DOE sites outside of controlled areas, and to those exposed to 
residual radioactive material subsequent to any remedial action or 
clearance of property. 
c. Temporary Dose Limits. 
(1) Special circumstances could affect a DOE radiological activity in such a 
manner that the potential dose to a member of the public could exceed a 
TED of 100 mrem (1 mSv) in a year. 
(2) The Field Element Manager1 may request specific authorization for a 
temporary public dose limit higher than 100 mrem (1 mSv) in a year from 
a Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation with the Chief Health, 
Safety and Security Officer. This request must include documentation that 
justifies the need for the increase, the alternatives considered, and the 
application of the ALARA process. 
(3) A Cognizant Secretarial Officer must limit approval of such requests to no 
more than 500 mrem (5 mSv) TED, provided that the average TED over any 
5 contiguous years does not exceed 100 mrem per year. 
(4) The specific exposure pathways excepted in paragraphs 4.b.(1)(a)1-4 are 
also excepted for temporary dose limits. 
d. As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA). 
(1) A documented ALARA process must be implemented to optimize control 
and management of radiological activities so that doses to members of the 
public (both individual and collective) and releases to the environment are 
                                                 
1 Includes operation office, site office, field office, area office, project office and service center.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 458.1 5 
2-11-2011  
 
 
kept as low as reasonably achievable. The process must be applied to the 
design or modification of facilities and conduct of activities that expose 
the public or the environment to radiation or radioactive material. 
(2) The ALARA process must: consider DOE sources, modes of exposure, 
and all pathways which potentially could result in the release of 
radioactive materials into the environment, or exposure to the public; use a 
graded approach; and to the extent practical and when appropriate, be 
coordinated with the 10 CFR Part 835 ALARA process. 
(3) The ALARA process must be applied to all routine radiological activities. 
Though not applicable to non-routine radiological events (for example, 
accidental, unplanned, or inadvertent releases or exposures), the ALARA 
process is applicable during recovery and remediation activities associated 
with a non-routine event. 
e. Demonstrating Compliance with the Public Dose Limit.  
(1) Dose evaluations to demonstrate compliance with the public dose limit in 
paragraph 4.b.(1) of this Order and to assess collective dose must include 
the following: 
(a) The TED to members of the public from exposure to radiation, 
airborne effluents, and liquid effluents, of DOE origin. 
1 Compliance may be demonstrated by calculating dose to 
the representative person or to the maximally exposed 
individual (MEI). 
2 Determination of the representative person or the MEI must 
include members of the public both on DOE sites outside of 
controlled areas and off DOE sites. 
3 If it is suspected that any of the dose limits specified in 
paragraph 4.b.(1)(a) of this Order may be exceeded or the 
estimated TED for members of the public exceeds 25 mrem 
(0.25 mSv) in a year, then dose to the lens of the eye, skin 
and extremities must be evaluated. 
(b) Analytical models that consider likely exposure pathways, such as: 
1 Direct external radiation from sources located on-site; 
2 External radiation from airborne radioactive material; 
3 External radiation from radioactive material deposited on 
surfaces off-site;

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
4 Internal radiation from inhaled airborne radioactive 
material; 
5 Internal radiation from radioactive material ingested with 
water, and with food from terrestrial crops or animal 
products (e.g., meat, eggs, milk); 
6 Internal radiation from radioactive material ingested with 
aquatic food products such as fish, shellfish, crustaceans 
(e.g., crayfish, shrimp, crab, lobsters), and aquatic plants 
and algae; 
7 External or internal radiation due to residual radioactive 
material on, or in, cleared real property; and 
8 Any other pathway unique to the DOE site or activity. 
(c) The dose to members of the public from DOE-related exposure 
sources only, if the projected DOE-related dose to the 
representative person or MEI is 25 mrem (0.25mSv) in a year or 
less. If the DOE-related dose is greater than 25 mrem in a year, the 
dose to members of the public must include both major non-DOE 
sources of exposure (excluding dose from radon and its decay 
products in air, background radiation dose, occupational doses and 
doses due to medical exposures) and dose from DOE-related 
sources. 
(d) Collective dose for members of the public resulting from radiation 
emitted and radioactive materials released from DOE radiological 
activities only (not including radon and its decay products). 
Collective dose for members of the public must be representative 
of the total dose and of adequate quality for supported 
comparisons, trending or decisions. Consistent with the graded 
approach, collective dose estimates may be truncated by distance 
(e.g., 50 miles) or individual dose level (e.g., 10 microrem) when 
integration of doses beyond such thresholds does not significantly 
affect data quality objectives. Where it is of concern, collective 
dose for members of the public resulting from radon and its decay 
products released by DOE radiological activities needs to be 
calculated separately from other radionuclides. 
(2) The estimated individual dose to the MEI or representative person that is 
representative of the persons or group likely to receive the most dose and 
is based on pathway and exposure parameters that are not likely to 
underestimate or substantially overestimate the dose, and, the collective 
dose (population dose) that is a realistic as practicable estimate of the sum 
of the doses to all members of the actual exposed population.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 458.1 7 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(3) Site-specific information on radiation source dispersion patterns, location 
and demography of members of the public in the vicinity of DOE 
radiological activities, land use, food supplies, and exposure pathway 
information must be updated, as necessary, to document significant 
changes that could affect dose evaluations. 
(4) Values of assumed default or site-specific parameters used in calculations 
must be identified and included with the documentation of the calculations. 
(5) Direct measurements must be made, to the extent practicable, to obtain 
information characterizing source terms, exposures, exposure modes, and 
other information needed in evaluating dose. 
(6) Models for dose evaluation calculations must be appropriate for their 
purpose.  Dose evaluation models that are codified or approved for use by 
regulators of DOE or by DOE must be used where applicable.  
Alternatives to such codified or approved dose evaluation models to be 
used for demonstrating compliance with this Order must be approved by 
the Field Element Manager and, as determined necessary by the Field 
Element Manager, in consultation with their Cognizant Secretarial Officer 
and the Office of Health, Safety and Security. 
(7) DOE-approved dose coefficients must be used to evaluate doses resulting 
from DOE radiological activities. Use of alternative dose coefficients must 
be approved by the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer or by a 
Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation with the Chief Health, Safety 
and Security Officer. 
(8) Doses to members of the public from airborne effluents must be evaluated 
with the CAP-88 model or another EPA-approved model or method to 
demonstrate compliance with applicable subparts of 40 CFR Part 61, 
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants. 
(9) Environmental monitoring must be conducted to characterize routine and 
non-routine releases of radioactive material from radiological activities, 
estimate the dispersal pattern in the environs, characterize the pathway(s) 
of exposure to members of the public and estimate the doses to individuals 
and populations in the vicinity of the site or operation commensurate with 
the nature of the DOE radiological activities and the risk to the public and 
the environment. Radiological monitoring must be integrated with the 
general environmental and effluent monitoring. Environmental monitoring 
must include, but is not limited to: 
(a) Effluent Monitoring 
(b) Environmental Surveillance

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
(c) Meteorological Monitoring. Meteorological monitoring must be 
commensurate with the level of site radiological activities, the site 
topographical characteristics, and the distance to critical receptors. 
The scope must be sufficient to characterize atmospheric 
dispersion and model the dose to members of the public over 
distances commensurate with the magnitude of potential source 
terms and possible pathways to the atmosphere. 
(d) Pre-operational Monitoring. Prior to the startup of a new site, 
facility or process with the potential to expose the public or 
environment to radiation or radioactive material, it is necessary to 
ensure that adequate knowledge exists to understand: 1) 
radiological background; 2) pertinent environmental and ecological 
parameters; and 3) potential pathways for human exposures or 
ecological/natural resource impacts either from existing data or 
documents (for example, NEPA evaluations or existing monitoring 
and surveillance programs, etc.) or from the conduct of a 
pre-operational study initiated at least one year prior to startup of a 
new operation. 
(10) Site-specific environmental monitoring criteria must be established to 
ensure that representative measurements of quantities and concentrations 
of radiological contaminants are conducted and that the effects from DOE 
radiological activities on members of the public and the environment are 
monitored sufficiently to demonstrate compliance with this Order. 
f. Airborne Radioactive Effluents. Radiological activities must be conducted in a 
manner such that the release of radioactive material to the atmosphere will: 
(1) Be evaluated using the ALARA process established in paragraph 4.d. of 
this Order; 
(2) Not cause radon-222 flux rates to exceed 20 pCi (0.7 Bq)/m2-sec averaged 
over the surface area overlaying waste, including the covering or other 
confinement structures, wherever radium-226 wastes are accepted for 
storage or disposal (See 40 CFR Part 61, Subparts Q and T); 
(3) Meet compliance agreements under 40 CFR Part 61, Subparts H, Q, and 
T; 
(4) Not cause the radon-220 and radon-222 decay product concentration, 
including background, to exceed 0.03 WL in buildings that are being 
released from DOE control. Further, a reasonable effort must be made to 
meet a 0.02WL generic guideline for annual average radon-220 and 
radon-222 decay product concentration, including background, in such 
buildings; and

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 458.1 9 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(5) Not exceed 3 pCi/L annual average radon-220 and radon-222 
concentration, not including background, at the site boundary if DOE 
activities release radon-220 and radon-222 or their decay products. 
g. Control and Management of Radionuclides from DOE Activities in Liquid 
Discharges. Operators of DOE facilities discharging or releasing liquids 
containing radionuclides from DOE activities must: 
(1) Characterize planned and unplanned releases of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities, consistent with the potential for 
on- and off-site impacts, and provide an assessment of radiological 
consequences as necessary to demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of this Order. 
(2) Comply with the ALARA process requirements in paragraph 4.d. of this 
Order. 
(3) Conduct activities to ensure that liquid releases containing radionuclides 
from DOE activities are managed in a manner that protects ground water 
resources now and in the future, based on use and value considerations. 
(4) Conduct activities to ensure that liquid discharges containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities do not exceed an annual average (at the 
point of discharge) of either of the following: 
(a) 5 pCi (0.2 Bq) per gram above background of settleable solids for 
alpha-emitting radionuclides. 
(b) 50 pCi (2 Bq) per gram above background of settleable solids for 
beta-gamma-emitting radionuclides. 
(5) Except for tritium and sanitary sewers, apply Best Available Technology 
(BAT) if at the point of discharge: 
(a) The annual average concentration of a given radionuclide is greater 
than the DOE-approved derived concentration standard (DCS) 
value for water contained in the Derived Concentration Technical 
Standard, DOE-STD-1196-2011, or for multiple radionuclides, the 
composite DCS must be the sum of the fractional DCS values 
derived from DOE-approved DCS values, 
(b) The discharge contributes greater than 10 mrem (0.1 mSv) annual 
TED to members of the public, or  
(c) The collective dose from all DOE sources is greater than 100 
person-rem (1 person-Sv) and the liquid discharge contributes 50 
percent or more of this collective dose.

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
(6) Control releases of tritium in a manner that has been established by 
application of the ALARA process. 
(7) Conduct radiological activities to ensure that radionuclides from DOE 
activities contained in liquid effluents do not cause private or public 
drinking water systems to exceed the drinking water maximum 
contaminant levels in 40 CFR Part 141, National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations. 
(8) Control discharges into sanitary sewers in accordance with the following 
requirements: 
(a) Except for excreta from patients and medical research volunteers 
treated with radioactive material, discharges of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities into non-Federally owned 
sanitary sewers are prohibited unless: 
1 The material is readily soluble (or readily dispersed 
biological materials) in water; 
2 Such discharges comply with ALARA process 
requirements; 
3 BAT is applied to discharges of liquid releases containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities if the average monthly 
concentration level at the point of discharge into the 
sanitary sewer is greater than five times the DOE-approved 
DCS values for ingestion except for tritium which is 
addressed under paragraph 4.g.(6); 
4 Releases do not result in an annual discharge (above 
background) into sanitary sewers in excess of 5 Ci (185 
GBq) of tritium; 1 Ci (37 GBq) carbon-14 or 1 Ci (37 GBq) 
of all other radionuclides combined; 
5 DOE operations are conducted to minimize long-term 
buildup of radionuclides in the sewage treatment plants that 
may create handling and disposal issues or interfere with 
plant operations; 
6 Operators of sewage treatment plants are informed of DOE 
practices and processes to radiologically control and clear 
discharges, and are notified of unusual discharges to 
sanitary sewers; 
7 The DOE Field Element Manager provides a report that 
describes and summarizes such discharges to sanitary 
sewers to appropriate local officials at least annually; and

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 458.1 11 
2-11-2011  
 
 
8 Existing agreements, contracts, statements of understanding 
or other formal arrangements with other agencies 
concerning the discharge of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities to sanitary sewers are 
not violated. 
(b) DOE facilities discharging liquids containing radionuclides from 
DOE activities into sanitary sewer systems owned by the Federal 
government are not subject to the requirements in paragraph 
4.g.(8)(a) of this Order if: 
1 The system provides treatment in accordance with the 
environmental radiological protection program and 
2 Sludge from the system is disposed of in accordance with 
this Order and applicable Federal, State, and municipal 
regulations. 
(9) Prohibit the use of soil columns. 
(10) Manage the disposition of non-process water potentially containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities to protect soil and ground water and 
prevent the creation of future cleanup sites. 
(11) Ensure that storm water runoff containing radionuclides from DOE 
activities is considered, as appropriate, as a pathway of exposure that has 
the potential for on- and off-site impacts. Using a graded approach, the 
receiving ecosystem including, but not limited to, wetlands, floodplains, 
streams, ponds, basins and lakes must be monitored to evaluate human or 
ecological impacts when warranted based on site specific risk. 
h. Radioactive Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel. 
(1) Management, Storage and Disposal of Radioactive Waste at DOE Sites. 
(a) Radiological activities must be conducted in a manner such that 
radiation exposure to members of the public from management and 
storage of radioactive waste complies with ALARA process 
requirements and does not result in a TED greater than 25 mrem 
(0.25 mSv) in a year from all exposure pathways and radiation 
sources associated with the waste, except for transportation and 
radon and its decay products. 
(b) DOE management of spent nuclear fuel, and high-level and 
transuranic wastes at a disposal facility which is not regulated by 
the NRC must comply with the requirements of this Order and 
40 CFR Part 191, Environmental Radiation Protection Standards

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
for Management and Disposal of Spent Nuclear Fuel, High-level 
and Transuranic Radioactive Wastes. 
(c) Management, storage and disposal of low-level radioactive waste 
must be conducted in a manner such that exposure to members of 
the public to radiation from radioactive waste complies with 
ALARA process requirements, and does not exceed a TED of 25 
mrem (0.25 mSv) in a year from all exposure pathways and 
radiation sources associated with the waste, except for 
transportation and radon and its decay products. 
(d) Management, storage and disposal of 11e.(2) byproduct material, 
as defined in Section 11e.(2) of the AEA and other wastes 
containing uranium and thorium and their decay products which 
are not subject to the requirements of 40 CFR Part 192, Health and 
Environmental Protection Standards for Uranium and Thorium 
Mill Tailings, are not at facilities licensed by the NRC, or are not 
disposed of at DOE low-level waste disposal facilities, must be in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph 4.h.(1) of this 
Order and DOE-approved plans.  
1 Disposal facilities for uranium and thorium wastes must be 
designed to: 
a Remain effective for 1,000 years, to the extent 
reasonably achievable, and, in any case, for at least 
200 years and 
b Provide reasonable assurance that releases of 
radon-222 to the atmosphere will not: (1) exceed an 
average release rate of 20 picocuries per square 
meter per second or (2) increase the annual average 
concentration of radon-222 in air at or above any 
location outside the disposal site by more than 
one-half picocurie per liter. 
2 For wastes containing significant concentrations of radium 
and thorium, special considerations must be given to 
measures to prevent inadvertent human intrusion. 
3 Before any potentially biodegradable contaminated wastes 
are placed in a disposal facility, such wastes must be 
conditioned so that the generation and escape of biogenic 
gases will not cause the emission or dose limits in 
paragraph 4.h.(1) of this Order to be exceeded and that 
bio-degradation within the facility will not result in 
premature structural failure.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 458.1 13 
2-11-2011  
 
 
4 All plans for the management and disposal of these wastes 
must provide for institutional controls and long-term 
stewardship of the disposal facility necessary to ensure 
continued performance. 
(e) AEA Section 11e.(3) and 11e.(4) Byproduct Material. Discrete 
sources of radium-226, accelerator produced radioactive material, 
or naturally-occurring radioactive material (NORM) that pose a 
threat similar to discrete sources of radium-226, which are defined 
as Section 11e.(3) or 11e.(4) byproduct material in the AEA, must 
be managed as high-level waste, low-level waste or 11e.(2) 
material as appropriate under DOE AEA authorities and in 
compliance with the requirements of this Order and DOE O 435.1, 
current version. 
i. Protection of Drinking Water and Ground Water. 
(1) DOE sites must provide a level of radiation protection for persons 
consuming water from a drinking water system operated by DOE, directly 
or through a DOE contractor, which is equivalent to that provided to 
members of the public by the community drinking water standards of 
40 CFR Part 141, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (that is, 
not exceed the radionuclide maximum contaminant levels (MCLs)). 
(2) Ground water must be protected from radiological contamination to ensure 
compliance with dose limits in the Order and consistent with ALARA 
process requirements. To this end, DOE must ensure that: 
(a) Baseline conditions of the ground water quantity and quality are 
documented; 
(b) Possible sources of, and potential for, radiological contamination 
are identified and assessed; 
(c) Strategies to control radiological contamination are documented 
and implemented; 
(d) Monitoring methodologies are documented and implemented; and 
(e) Ground water monitoring activities are integrated with other 
environmental monitoring activities. 
j. Protection of Biota. 
(1) Radiological activities that have the potential to impact the environment 
must be conducted in a manner that protects populations of aquatic 
animals, terrestrial plants, and terrestrial animals in local ecosystems from

--- page 14 ---
14 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
adverse effects due to radiation and radioactive material released from 
DOE operations. 
(2) When actions taken to protect humans from radiation and radioactive 
materials are not adequate to protect biota then evaluations must be done 
to demonstrate compliance with paragraph 4.j.(1) of this Order in one or 
more of the following ways: 
(a) Use DOE-STD-1153-2002, A Graded Approach for Evaluating 
Radiation Doses to Aquatic and Terrestrial Biota. 
(b) Use an alternative approach to demonstrate that the dose rates to 
representative biota populations do not exceed the dose rate criteria 
in DOE-STD-1153-2002, Table 2.2. 
(c) Use an ecological risk assessment to demonstrate that radiation and 
radioactive material released from DOE operations will not 
adversely affect populations within the ecosystem. 
k. Release and Clearance of Property. Release or clearance of property with the 
potential to contain residual radioactive material must be conducted in accordance 
with the requirements in paragraph 4.k. of this Order. 2 
(1) Property control and clearance processes must be developed and 
implemented in accordance with the dose limits in paragraph 4.b. under 
any plausible use of the property and the ALARA process requirements in 
paragraph 4.d. of this Order must be met before property is cleared. 
(2) Dose Constraints. Unless alternative dose constraints are approved by 
issuance of a directive or memorandum by the Chief Health, Safety and 
Security Officer or for NNSA, the Cognizant Secretarial Officer in 
consultation with the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer, the 
following dose constraints for DOE residual radioactive material must be 
applied to each specific clearance of property for any actual or likely 
future use of the property: 
(a) Real property – a TED of 25 mrem (0.25 mSv) above background 
in any calendar year; 
(b) Personal property - a TED of 1 mrem (0.01 mSv) above 
background in any calendar year. 
                                                 
2 In addition to paragraph 4.k of this Order, the following may have applicable requirements regarding clearance of 
property: 41 CFR Chapter 109, Department of Energy Property Management Regulations; 10 CFR Part 770, 
Transfer of Real Property at Defense Nuclear Facilities for Economic Development; and DOE O 430.1, Real 
Property Asset Management, current version.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 458.1 15 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(3) Residual Radioactive Material. Property potentially containing residual 
radioactive material must not be cleared from DOE control unless either: 
(a) The property is demonstrated not to contain residual radioactive 
material based on process and historical knowledge, radiological 
monitoring or surveys, or a combination of these; or 
(b) The property is evaluated and appropriately monitored or surveyed 
to determine: 
1 The types and quantities of residual radioactive material 
within the property; 
2 The quantities of removable and total residual radioactive 
material on property surfaces (including residual 
radioactive material present on and under any coating);  
3 That for property with potentially contaminated surfaces 
that are difficult to access for radiological monitoring or 
surveys, an evaluation of residual radioactive material on 
such surfaces is performed which is: 
a Based on process and historical knowledge meeting 
the requirements of paragraph 4.k.(5) of this Order 
and monitoring and or surveys, to the extent 
feasible and 
b Sufficient to demonstrate that applicable specific or 
pre-approved DOE Authorized Limits will not be 
exceeded; and 
4 That any residual radioactive material within or on the 
property is in compliance with applicable specific or 
pre-approved DOE Authorized Limits. 
(4) Evaluation of the Need for Maintaining Institutional Controls for Real 
Property. Real property under evaluation for clearance from DOE 
radiological controls must be evaluated against the need for maintaining 
institutional controls or impacting long-term stewardship of adjacent DOE 
real property. In situations where transfer of the real property to other use 
would impact long-term radiological protection of adjacent DOE 
properties, it must be demonstrated that the impact of the property 
clearance would not result in noncompliance for the adjacent property 
with the requirements of this Order, DOE O 435.1, current version, or 
other applicable statutes, regulations or orders. 
(5) Process and Historical Knowledge. Organizations responsible for 
radiological clearance of property, when they rely in part, on process

--- page 16 ---
16 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
knowledge as a basis for clearance decisions, must establish a documented 
evaluation process, using a graded approach, for applying process and 
historical knowledge to determine if property potentially contains residual 
radioactive material. 
(a) This process must include procedures for evaluating operational 
records and operating history, including the use of any radioactive 
materials or radiation generating devices. 
(b) For real property, this process must address each specific property 
individually. If several parcels of land are contiguous, or if several 
structures are located in the same area and have a common 
operational history, a single evaluation for all of the properties is 
acceptable. 
(c) If available process and historical knowledge cannot demonstrate 
that property does not contain residual radioactive materials, 
radiological monitoring or surveys must be conducted to 
supplement process and historical knowledge evaluations. 
(d) If not supplemented by radiological surveys, process and historical 
knowledge evaluations must be adequate to determine: 
1 Whether the property has ever been used for radiological 
activities or in areas that could have resulted in the 
presence of residual radioactive material within or on the 
property or 
2 Whether property formerly containing residual radioactive 
material has been decontaminated and demonstrated to 
meet DOE Authorized Limits, and has not been used in a 
manner or in areas that could have resulted in the 
re-contamination of the property. 
(e) For property that is determined to potentially contain residual 
radioactive material under paragraph 4.k.(5)(d)1, or determined to 
be re-contaminated under paragraph 4.k.(5)(d)2, the process and 
historical knowledge evaluation must also include an assessment of 
the types and quantities of residual radioactive material and the 
sources and pathways by which the property became contaminated.  
(6) Authorized Limits.  
(a) Authorized Limits must be established and approved for the 
clearance of any property with residual radioactive material to 
provide reasonable assurance that the requirements of paragraphs 
4.k.(1) and 4.k.(2) are met. Authorized Limits may be applied to 
property for which process knowledge cannot establish the absence

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 458.1 17 
2-11-2011  
 
 
of residual radioactive material and in which the presence of 
residual radioactive material cannot be determined.  
(b) Authorized Limits must:  
1 Be developed in accordance with the ALARA requirements 
in paragraph 4.d. of this Order; 
2 Be based on the applicable dose constraint, supported by a 
complete exposure pathway analysis using appropriate 
methodologies, techniques, parameters and models (such as 
the RESRAD family of codes) that meet DOE quality 
assurance requirements under DOE O 414.1, Quality 
Assurance, current version; 
3 Be expressed in terms of concentration of radioactivity per 
unit surface area (e.g., dpm per 100 cm2), radioactivity per 
unit mass (e.g., pCi per gram) or volume (e.g., pCi per ml), 
total radioactivity, or DOE controls and restrictions, if 
applicable; 
4 Explicitly state any restrictions or conditions on future use 
of the property necessary to ensure the basic dose limit and 
applicable dose constraint are not exceeded; 
5 Include written notification of applicable Federal, State, or 
local regulatory agencies, or Tribal governments; 
6 Be approved in accordance with paragraph 4.k.(6)(d); and  
7 In addition to paragraphs 4.k.(6)(b)1-6, for clearance of 
personal property only: 
a Be based on expected annual quantity of property to 
be cleared or 
b Be based on expected total amount of property 
cleared over the life of the project for specific 
remedial action or decontamination and 
decommissioning projects and 
c Prior to clearance of metals, the Field Element 
Manager must determine that there is no practical 
internal DOE opportunity for reuse or recycle of the 
material or equipment. 
(c) Applications for DOE approval of Authorized Limits must contain 
the following:

--- page 18 ---
18 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
1 A description of the property. 
2 Specific limits proposed for each radionuclide or group of 
radionuclides and/or external radiation exposure, surrogate 
metrics, or conditions used to limit radionuclides. 
3 Potential collective dose to the exposed population and the 
potential dose to a member of the public most likely to 
receive the highest dose for both: actual or likely future 
use, and plausible future use of the property. 
4 ALARA assessments conducted under paragraph 4.d. of 
this Order for the proposed clearance action to include, at a 
minimum, the effects of:  
a Implementing the proposed Authorized Limits; 
b Implementing alternative levels of residual 
radioactive material instead of the proposed 
Authorized Limits; 
c Not implementing the proposed Authorized Limits, 
i.e., not proceeding with the proposed clearance 
action. 
5 A description of the procedures and radiological 
monitoring or surveys to be used to demonstrate 
compliance with proposed limits. 
6 Identification of any restrictions or conditions on the future 
use of the property upon which the proposed limits are 
based, and the means by which the restrictions or 
conditions will be implemented and maintained. 
7 Evidence of notification of applicable Federal, State or 
local regulatory agencies or Tribal governments. 
8 An estimated date for when the property will be cleared and 
an estimate of when the property will be released from 
DOE control. 3 
(d) DOE Approval of Authorized Limits. All Authorized Limits must 
be approved in writing. The use of pre-approved Authorized Limits 
                                                 
3 This information is needed to support the DOE expectation stated at 72 FR 31904, 31906 (10 CFR Part 835, June 
8, 2007) that the material, equipment, or real property to which the 10 CFR Part 835.1(b)(6) exclusion is applied 
will be released from DOE control according to a specified time interval.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 458.1 19 
2-11-2011  
 
 
are approved by the Field Element Manager under paragraph 
4.k.(6)(f). Otherwise: 
1 Authorized Limits for real property require Field Element 
Manager approval in consultation with the Cognizant 
Secretarial Officer. 
2 The Field Element Manager approves Authorized Limits 
for personal property (including any restrictions or 
conditions on future use of the personal property) under the 
following conditions: 
a Clearance of the property must not cause a TED to a 
member of the public in excess of 1 mrem (0.01 
mSv) in any year or a public collective dose of more 
than 10 person-rem (0.1 person-Sv) in any year due 
to residual radioactive material for any actual or 
likely future use of the property; 
b Documentation supporting the Authorized Limits is 
provided to the responsible Cognizant Secretarial 
Officer and the Chief Health, Safety and Security 
Officer at least 45 working days prior to the 
intended implementation date of the Authorized 
Limits; and 
c The Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation 
with the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer 
does not notify the Field Element Manager within 
30 working days of receipt of application that the 
documentation is incomplete or that the Authorized 
Limits are not acceptable. 
Otherwise; Authorized Limits for personal property must 
be approved by the Cognizant Secretarial Officer in 
consultation with the Chief Health, Safety and Security 
Officer. 
3 Authorized Limits for property that has not been released 
from DOE control must meet the criteria in paragraphs 
4.k.(6)(a) through (d) of this Order and be approved by a 
Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation with the Chief 
Health, Safety and Security Officer if such property is to be 
excluded from the provisions of 10 CFR Part 835. 
(e) Revision of Authorized Limits. If established Authorized Limits 
are found to be not protective, appropriate or practical to apply for

--- page 20 ---
20 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
a specific type or portion of property, further clearance for that 
specific type or portion of property must not proceed without 
revised Authorized Limits. 
1 An application for revised Authorized Limits must be 
submitted in accordance with the requirements in 
paragraphs 4.k.(6)(a) through (d) of this Order. 
2 Approval of revised Authorized Limits must be provided in 
accordance with the requirements in paragraph 4.k.(6)(d) of 
this Order. 
3 In addition to the requirements of applicable paragraphs of 
4.k.(6) of this Order, requests for approval of revised 
Authorized Limits must include a justification for the need 
for the revised Authorized Limits. Justifications for revised 
Authorized Limits must be based upon one of the 
following: 
a Complying with existing Authorized Limits would 
pose a clear and present risk of injury to general 
employees or members of the public; or 
b Complying with existing Authorized Limits would 
produce environmental harm (e.g., destruction of 
artifacts, ecological damage, loss of cultural assets) 
that is clearly excessive compared to the potential 
health benefits to persons exposed to affected 
properties; or  
c Complying with existing Authorized Limits is 
unreasonably costly relative to long-term benefits 
and where the residual radioactive material does not 
pose a clear present or future potential of exceeding 
the public dose limit of paragraph 4.b.(1) of this 
Order; or 
d Portions of the project or activity for which the 
scenarios or assumptions used to establish the 
existing Authorized Limits are overly conservative, 
or where more appropriate scenarios or assumptions 
indicate that other limits are applicable or 
appropriate for protection of the public and the 
environment; or

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 458.1 21 
2-11-2011  
 
 
e New information which indicates the existing 
Authorized Limits are not sufficient to meet the 
protective requirements of this Order. 
(f) Pre-Approved Authorized Limits. 
1 The following values have been pre-approved by DOE for 
use as Authorized Limits, and may be used as specified 
below instead of developing and approving specific 
Authorized Limits. 
a For radium-226 and radium-228 in soil - 5 pCi/gram 
(0.2 Bq/gram) in excess of background levels, 
averaged over 100 m2, in the first 15 cm depth of 
the surface layer of soil; and 15 pCi/gram (0.56 
Bq/gram) in excess of background levels, averaged 
over any subsequent 15 cm subsurface layer of soil 
plus an ALARA assessment. If both thorium-230 
and radium-226 or both thorium-232 and 
radium-228 are present and not in secular 
equilibrium, the appropriate pre-approved limit 
must be applied to the radionuclide with the higher 
concentration. 
b Previously approved guidelines and limits (such as 
the surface activity guidelines) may continue to be 
applied and used as Pre-Approved Authorized 
Limits until they are replaced or revised by 
Pre-Approved Authorized Limits issued under this 
Order. 
2 Other Pre-Approved Authorized Limits must be approved 
by the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer or the 
responsible Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation 
with the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer. 
a The approvals may be made through a DOE 
memorandum but must be included in a DOE 
Directive issued under DOE O 251.1, current 
version, or a Technical Standard under DOE O 
252.1, Technical Standards Program, current 
version, within eighteen months of issuance. 
b Pre-Approved Authorized Limits must provide 
reasonable expectation that their implementation 
will comply with the requirements in paragraphs 
4.k.(1) and 4.k.(2) of this Order.

--- page 22 ---
22 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
c The scope of applicability (e.g., property, activities, 
or radionuclides) and conditions of, or restrictions 
on, their use must be documented. 
3 Pre-Approved Authorized Limits may be used for any 
radiological activity instead of developing specific 
Authorized Limits if their use is documented in the 
environmental radiological protection program and the 
specific application of the Authorized Limits is approved 
by the responsible Field Element Manager. 
(g) Documentation of Approved Authorized Limits. Approved 
Authorized Limits and approved revised Authorized Limits and 
supporting documentation must be made available to the public. 
(7) Clearance of Environmental Restoration, Deactivation and 
Decommissioning, and Other Cleanup Materials. 
(a) Clearance of property with residual radioactive material from 
environmental restoration activities, including deactivation and 
decommissioning, must meet the requirements of this Order. 
Environmental restoration activities using the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
(CERCLA) process may demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of this Order (including public dose assessments, 
ALARA analysis, and consideration of scenarios) using 
documentation from the CERCLA process and any necessary 
supplemental information. 
(b) For the purpose of clearance of real or personal property, approved 
CERCLA remediation criteria may be considered equivalent to 
Authorized Limits if the appropriate Field Element Manager has 
determined that the criteria meet the requirements in this Order for 
Authorized Limits, and provided that the use of the criteria as DOE 
Authorized Limits is documented and approved as would be an 
Authorized Limit. Compliance with all requirements of this Order 
not met through the CERCLA process must also be demonstrated. 
(c) Field Elements performing environmental restoration activities 
involving clearance of real or personal property with residual 
radioactive material under CERCLA that use the CERCLA 
analysis and documentation in lieu of DOE O 458.1-specific 
analysis and documentation to demonstrate compliance with this 
Order must: 
1 Submit certification to a Cognizant Secretarial Officer that 
compliance with the requirements of this Order for

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 458.1 23 
2-11-2011  
 
 
clearance of property has been met using documentation 
from the CERCLA process and 
2 Submit the relevant CERCLA documentation and any 
additional information necessary to demonstrate that the 
requirements for Authorized Limits have been met to a 
Cognizant Secretarial Officer and provide a copy to the 
Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer. 
(8) Radiological Monitoring or Surveys. 
(a) All radiological monitoring or surveys performed in support of 
clearance of property must: 
1 Use methodologies sufficient to meet measurement 
objectives such as those in the Multi-Agency Radiation 
Survey and Site Investigation Manual (MARSSIM), the 
Multi-Agency Radiation Survey and Assessment of 
Materials and Equipment Manual (MARSAME) or other 
methodologies approved by DOE;  
2 Meet Measurement Quality Objectives; 
3 Use DOE-approved sampling and analysis techniques, if 
applicable; and  
4 Include an evaluation of non-uniformly distributed residual 
radioactive material, if applicable. 
(b) Instrumentation used for radiological monitoring or surveys must 
be capable of detecting and quantifying residual radioactive 
material consistent with the applicable Authorized Limits, and be: 
1 Periodically maintained and calibrated on an established 
frequency; 
2 Appropriate for the type(s), levels, and energies of the 
radiation(s) encountered; and 
3 Appropriate for existing environmental conditions and 
routinely tested for operability. 
(9) Documentation and Verification. 
(a) DOE elements responsible for radiological clearance of property 
must ensure that final radiological monitoring or surveys are 
conducted and that documentation is prepared that shows that the 
clearance meets applicable DOE Authorized Limits, or other

--- page 24 ---
24 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
applicable requirements including associated restrictions or 
institutional controls (See DOE P 454.1, Use of Institutional 
Controls, current version). 
(b) DOE Field Element Managers responsible for oversight of 
clearance processes must implement oversight duties to verify that 
the contractor assurance program is ensuring that the applicable 
radiological clearance requirements have been met. DOE must 
determine the type and scope of oversight activities necessary to 
independently verify compliance. Such oversight must use a 
graded approach commensurate with the Department’s 
requirements to implement DOE oversight functions (See DOE O 
226.1, current version). 
1 The graded approach to the independent verification 
activities must be commensurate with the scope, 
complexity, and risk associated with the clearance action. 
The oversight must, at a minimum, ensure procedures, 
instruments, data and analyses, and documentation used for 
the clearance are adequate to comply with the requirements 
of this Order. 
2 Oversight for personal property releases will be graded at 
the discretion of DOE to include formal assessments, if 
necessary, but at a minimum must include operational 
awareness of radiological monitoring and survey 
instrumentation, radiological survey procedures, 
recordkeeping, methodologies, and techniques used for the 
clearance of such property to ensure their adequacy. If 
deemed appropriate by the Field Element Manager, such as 
in cases of high technical complexity or poor historical 
performance, a more formal independent verification 
process (e.g., peer review, third party support in review of 
clearance processes or independent audit or sampling) may 
be instituted. 
3 The independent verification activities required for the 
clearance of all real property must, at a minimum, include 
review of the radiological characterization report or data, 
but, as appropriate, may include independent surveys or 
sample analysis to verify compliance. If the real property is 
to be transferred to the public, or managed by another 
agency/entity other than DOE or a new facility constructed, 
an independent verification plan will be prepared and 
independent verification surveys and sample analysis will 
be conducted to verify compliance, unless determined to be

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 458.1 25 
2-11-2011  
 
 
unneeded by DOE because, for example, the transferred 
property will be under a license. 
4 Independent verification must be performed by DOE 
personnel not directly involved in the specific clearance 
action or by a contractor who is independent of the 
contractor conducting clearance activities. The personnel 
performing independent verification activities must:  
a Report directly to DOE,  
b Have sufficient authority and freedom to report 
unresolved issues to the Field Element Manager, 
and  
c Be qualified or have sufficient knowledge and 
experience to oversee radiological clearance 
activities.  
(10) Public Notification of Clearance of Property. 
(a) Field Element Managers must, as appropriate, incorporate 
information on site clearance policies and protocols, process 
knowledge decisions, approved Authorized Limits, any approved 
revised Authorized Limits, use of pre-approved Authorized Limits, 
and property control and clearance programs into effective site 
public notification and communications programs. 
(b) Information on approved Authorized Limits, any approved revised 
Authorized Limits, use of pre-approved Authorized Limits, results 
of radiological monitoring and surveys of cleared property with 
type and quantity of property cleared, and independent verification 
results must be summarized in the Annual Site Environmental 
Report. 
(c) The responsible field element must make documentation on 
clearance of property available to the public and to the property 
owner or recipient as appropriate. 
(11) Final Clearance Documentation. Clearance of property must be 
documented. The contents of the documentation or the mechanism for 
documenting information may be tailored to the need, situation, and type 
of property being cleared. For ongoing, routine clearances, e.g., clearance 
of personal property from controlled areas, such documentation may be 
based on the general process(es) rather than each specific clearance. In 
general, the documentation must describe the clearance process(es) and 
the property being cleared.

--- page 26 ---
26 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
(a) The documentation must serve to demonstrate requirements have 
been met, show criteria used for clearance, identify the property’s 
destination or disposition, as appropriate, and provide additional 
confidence to DOE and assurance to other interested parties that 
the public and the environment are being protected. The 
documentation must indicate any Authorized Limits, including any 
revised or pre-approved Authorized Limits used for the clearance, 
and include information and data supporting the clearance of 
property such as radiological certification and independent 
verification results and summarize the annual quantities cleared. 
(b) Field Element Managers or their designees must ensure in the 
preparation and maintenance of documentation that property being 
sold or otherwise cleared from DOE radiological control: 
1 Meets all DOE radiological protection requirements, 
2 Is not required to be controlled for national security 
reasons, and 
3 Meets DOE property control requirements. 
l. Records, Retention and Reporting Requirements.  
(1) Records must be maintained to document compliance with the 
requirements of this Order. 
(2) Required records include the following: 
(a) Information and data necessary to identify and characterize 
releases of radioactive material to the environment, their fate in the 
environment, and their probable impact on radiation dose to 
members of the public, and any impacts on ecological systems. 
(b) Documentation of individual and collective dose to members of the 
public due to radiological activities. This includes documentation 
of site-specific information on radiation source dispersion patterns, 
location and demography of members of the public in the vicinity 
of the radiological activity and assumed default values or 
site-specific parameters used in calculations. 
(c) Requests for specific authorization for temporary public dose 
limits, and subsequent approvals and other related actions. 
(d) Identification of radiological activities subject to environmental 
radiological protection program requirements, and descriptions of 
the measures to be used in implementing these requirements.

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 458.1 27 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(e) Documentation of actions taken to implement the ALARA process 
identified in paragraph 4.d. of this Order. 
(f) Documentation of actions taken to demonstrate compliance with 
the public dose limit [See paragraph 4.e.(1) of this Order]. 
(g) Documentation of actions taken to implement the BAT selection 
process in regulating liquid discharges, including documentation of 
analyses and factors considered to be important, including 
alternative processes, for the BAT selection process. 
(h) Effluent monitoring and environmental surveillance information 
and data, including: 
1 Results of effluent monitoring for determining sources of 
radiation and radioactive material that provide direct 
exposure to members of the public and releases of 
radioactive material in liquid or airborne effluent; 
2 Results of surveys for radiation and radioactive material in 
the environment; 
3 Results of surveys, measurements, and calculations used to 
determine the dose to members of the public and ecological 
receptors from external and internal radiation sources; 
4 Meteorological data used in assessing dose; and 
5 Results of pre-operational monitoring. 
(i) Documentation related to the long-term management of radioactive 
waste and residual radioactive material.  
(j) Final documentation for clearance of property containing residual 
radioactive material. 
(k) Documentation of:  
1 Approved Authorized Limits for routine clearance of 
property for unrestricted or restricted use and the scenarios 
evaluated in selecting the limits, 
2 Approved revised Authorized Limits for clearance of 
property, and 
3 Written notification of applicable Federal, State or local 
regulatory agencies or Tribal governments (See paragraph 
4.k.(6)(c)7 of this Order).

--- page 28 ---
28 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
(l) Annual summaries related to clearance of property. 
(3) Records required by this Order must be maintained by, or transferred to, 
DOE upon cessation of a DOE radiological activity at a site. 
(4) Records must be retained until final disposition is authorized by DOE in 
accordance with DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current 
version. 
(5) Reporting. 
(a) Reporting requirements for this Order are contained in DOE O 
232.2, Occurrence Reporting and Processing of Operations 
Information, current version, and DOE O 231.1, Environment, 
Safety and Health Reporting, current version. 
(b) The responsible Field Element Manager must notify a Cognizant 
Secretarial Officer and the Chief Health, Safety and Security 
Officer within 30 calendar days when it has been identified that 
any requirement in this Order that is not required to be reported 
under paragraph 4.l.(5)(a) has not been met. 
(6) Units. Unless otherwise specified, the quantities used in the reports and 
records required by this Order must be clearly indicated in special units of 
curie, rad, roentgen, or rem, including multiples and subdivisions of these 
units, or other conventional units, such as dpm, dpm/100 cm2, or mass 
units. The SI units, becquerel (Bq), gray (Gy), and sievert (Sv) may be 
provided parenthetically for reference with scientific standards. 
m. Implementation. Full implementation of the requirements of this Order must be 
completed within 18 months of its issuance, unless a different implementation 
schedule is approved by a Cognizant Secretarial Officer. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES.  
a. Cognizant Secretarial Officers (or Designees).  
(1) Ensure that the requirements of this Order are implemented throughout 
organizations under their purview. 
(2) Request through the annual Department budgetary process the funding and 
resources needed to implement the requirements of this Order. 
(3) Assess as part of line oversight of field elements under their purview, the 
implementation of the requirements, and the responsibilities of paragraph 
5.b. of the Order. 
(4) Approve Temporary Dose Limits in accordance with paragraphs 4.c.(2) 
and (3) of this Order.

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 458.1 29 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(5) Approve or consult on Authorized Limits for clearance of property in 
accordance with the requirements of this Order. 
(6) Notify a field organization if the requested Authorized Limit, revised 
Authorized Limit, or supporting materials are incomplete or not acceptable 
within 30 working days of receipt of a submitted application.  
(7) Identify to which contracts the CRD should apply and notify the cognizant 
contracting officer.  
b. Field Element Managers.  
(1) Implement the requirements in this Order for radiological activities under 
their purview. Such implementation must include, but may not be limited 
to ensuring that: 
(a) Environmental radiological protection programs are established 
and maintained, 
(b) Reviews of the sites’ effectiveness in implementing the 
requirements in this Order are conducted, and 
(c) All records, reports, and documentation required by this Order are 
prepared, issued, and/or retained in accordance with applicable 
requirements. 
(2) Approve applicable Authorized Limits for clearance of property in 
accordance with the requirements of this Order. 
(3) Ensure that sites’ annual budget requests include the funding and 
resources needed to implement the requirements of this Order. 
(4) Determine the type and scope of oversight activities necessary to 
independently verify compliance and implement the site independent 
verification activities. 
(5) Ensure that appropriate capabilities are maintained for monitoring and 
assessing routine and unplanned releases of radioactive materials, 
consistent with the types of radioactive materials released, release modes, 
and radiological activities conducted. 
(6) Ensure that agreements, permits, leases, licenses, or other legally-binding 
obligations between DOE and a tenant or concessionaire entered into after 
the effective date of this Order, require that the tenant or concessionaire 
take actions relating to matters within the scope of the contract that 
facilitate DOE’s compliance with this Order. 
(7) Temporarily suspend any requirement of this Order when doing so is in 
their judgment necessary to minimize damage to life or property or to

--- page 30 ---
30 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
protect public health or safety. Whenever this provision is invoked, such 
suspension and the reason for it are to be reported to a Cognizant 
Secretarial Officer and to the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer at 
the earliest practicable time. 
(8) Approve use of an alternative approach capable of demonstrating that the 
dose rates to representative biota populations do not exceed the dose rate 
criteria in DOE-STD-1153-2002, Table 2.2. 
(9) Ensure survey methods and modeling are adequate to meet the 
requirements of this Order, and consult with the Office of Health, Safety 
and Security as necessary. 
c. Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer. 
(1) Develops new, or revises existing DOE directives, policies, guidance, 
standards, requirements and procedures related to this Order and CRD, 
and provides assistance on implementation issues. 
(2) Plans and conducts appraisals to determine compliance with requirements 
of this Order. (See DOE O 227.1, Independent Oversight Program, current 
version). 
(3) Evaluates the effectiveness of Departmental elements’ implementation of 
the requirements and responsibilities of this Order. 
(4) Provides consultation to Cognizant Secretarial Officers on approval 
decisions related to the following: 
(a) Requests for specific authorizations for a temporary public dose 
limit and 
(b) Authorized Limits for real and personal property, and property 
excluded from the provisions of 10 CFR Part 835. 
(5) Approves or provides consultation to Cognizant Secretarial Officers’ 
approval decisions, or for NNSA sites provides consultation to the NNSA 
Cognizant Secretarial Officer, on the following: 
(a) The use of alternative dose coefficients,  
(b) Alternative dose constraints for DOE residual radioactive material, 
and 
(c) Other (Alternative) Pre-Approved Authorized Limits. 
(6) Consults in Field Element Managers’ approval of alternative dose 
evaluation models, or for NNSA sites, provides consultation to the NNSA 
Cognizant Secretarial Officer.

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 458.1 31 
2-11-2011  
 
 
(7) Following receipt of Authorized Limit applications provides consultation 
to Cognizant Secretarial Officers on whether the supporting 
documentation is incomplete, or if the Authorized Limits are not 
acceptable. 
d. Office of the Chief Financial Officer, in coordination with other Departmental 
elements, ensures that requests for funding by Departmental elements responsible 
for the development of policies, directives, and programs for maintaining the 
radiological protection of the public and the environment are considered in the 
annual budget requests. 
e. Contracting Officers or Representatives. Modify contracts to incorporate the 
Contractor Requirements Document in Attachment 1. 
6. INVOKED TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The following DOE technical standard is 
invoked as required methods in this Order in accordance with the applicability and 
conditions described within this Order. Any technical standard or industry standard that is 
mentioned in or referenced by this Order, but is not included in the list below, is not 
invoked by this Order.  Note:  DOE O 251.1D, Appendix J provides a definition for 
“invoked technical standard.” 
DOE-STD-1196-2011, Derived Concentration Technical Standard.  This technical 
standard establishes the DOE-approved concentrations for comparison with average 
annual concentrations of radionuclides at discharge to determine the need for applying 
Best Available Technology.  See Section 4.g. and Attachment 1, Section 2.g. for specific 
requirements.   
7. REFERENCES.  
a. P.L. 106-65, Title 32, National Nuclear Security Administration Act, as amended, 
which established a separately organized agency within the Department of 
Energy. 
b. 42 U.S.C. 2011, et seq., Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, which 
authorizes the conduct of atomic energy activities and establishes authority for 
protecting the health and safety of the public. 
c. 42 U.S.C. 300f et seq., Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) as amended, which 
authorizes EPA to promulgate regulations under two specific programs: the first 
protects the Nation's public drinking water supplies; the second protects 
subsurface waters by regulating underground injection of materials. 
d. DOE P 226.12, Policy for Federal Oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems, 
current version, which establishes DOE’s expectations for the implementation of 
a comprehensive and robust oversight process that enables the Department’s 
mission to be accomplished effectively and efficiently while maintaining the 
highest standard of performance for safety and security.

--- page 32 ---
32 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
e. DOE P 450.4, Integrated Safety Management System Policy, current version, 
which establishes DOE’s expectation for environment, safety and health, 
including integrated safety management that will enable DOE’s mission goals to 
be accomplished efficiently while ensuring safe operations at all Departmental 
facilities and activities. 
f. DOE P 454.1, Use of Institutional Controls, current version, which delineates 
how DOE will use institutional controls in the management of resources, facilities 
and properties under its control and to implement its programmatic 
responsibilities. 
g. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current 
version, which establishes requirements and provides direction for implementing 
DOE P 226.2, Policy for Federal Oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems, 
current version.  
h. DOE O 227.1, Independent Oversight Program, current version, which prescribes 
the requirements and responsibilities for DOE’s Independent Oversight Program. 
i. DOE O 231.1, Environment, Safety and Health Reporting, current version, which 
ensures the Department of Energy, including NNSA, receives timely and accurate 
information about events that have affected or could adversely affect the health, 
safety and security of the public or workers, the environment, the operations of 
DOE facilities, or the credibility of the Department. 
j. DOE O 232.2, Occurrence Reporting and Processing of Operations Information, 
current version, which ensures that DOE and NNSA are informed about events 
that could adversely affect the health and safety of the public or the workers, the 
environment, DOE missions, or the credibility of the Department. 
k. DOE O 243.1, Records Management Program, current version, which sets forth 
requirements and responsibilities for implementing and maintaining a 
cost-effective records management program throughout DOE. 
l. DOE O 251.1D, Departmental Directives Program, current version, which 
defines requirements and responsibilities for implementing DOE’s Directives 
Program, and establishes directives as the primary means to set, communicate, 
and institutionalize policies, requirements, responsibilities, and procedures for 
DOE elements and contractors. 
m. DOE O 252.1, Technical Standards Program, current version, which promotes 
the use of voluntary consensus standards by DOE as the primary method for 
application of technical standards, and establishes and manages the Technical 
Standards Program including technical standards development, information, 
activities, issues and interactions.  
n. DOE O 413.3, Program and Project Management for the Acquisition of Capital 
Assets, current version, which provides the Department of Energy, including

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 458.1 33 
2-11-2011  
 
 
NNSA, with program and project management direction for the acquisition of 
capital assets with the goal of delivering projects within the original performance 
baseline, cost and schedule, and fully capable of meeting mission performance, 
safeguards and security, and environmental, safety and health requirements unless 
impacted by a directed change. 
o. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version, which contains requirements to 
ensure that DOE, including NNSA, products and services meet or exceed 
customers’ expectations, to achieve QA for all work, and to establish additional 
process-specific quality requirements to be implemented under a QA program for 
the control of suspect/counterfeit items, and nuclear safety software.  
p. DOE O 430.1, Real Property Asset Management, current version, which 
establishes a corporate, holistic, and performance-based approach to real property 
life-cycle asset management that links real property asset planning, programming, 
budgeting, and evaluation to program mission projections and performance 
outcomes. 
q. DOE G 435.1-1, Implementation Guide for Use with DOE M 435.1-1, current 
version, which aids in implementing the requirements of DOE M 435.1-1, related 
to general requirements and responsibilities, high-level waste requirements, 
transuranic waste requirements and low-level waste requirements. 
r. DOE M 435.1-1, Radioactive Waste Management Manual, current version, which 
catalogs procedural requirements and existing practices to ensure that all DOE 
elements and contractors continue to manage DOE’s radioactive waste in a 
manner that is protective of worker and public health and safety and the 
environment. 
s. DOE O 435.1, Radioactive Waste Management, current version, which 
establishes requirements to ensure that all DOE radioactive waste is managed in a 
manner that is protective of worker and public health and safety and the 
environment. 
t. DOE-STD-1153-2002, A Graded Approach for Evaluating Radiation Doses to 
Aquatic and Terrestrial Biota, dated 7-02, which provides methods, models, and 
guidance within a graded approach that DOE and its contractors may use to 
evaluate doses of ionizing radiation to populations of aquatic animals, terrestrial 
plants, and terrestrial animals from DOE activities for the purpose of 
demonstrating protection, and provides dose evaluation methods that can be used 
to meet the requirements of DOE’s Order on Radiation Protection of the Public 
and the Environment. 
u. DOE-STD-1196-2011, Derived Concentration Technical Standard, dated 4-11, 
which establishes the numerical values of Derived Concentration Standards in a 
manner reflecting the current state of knowledge and practice in radiation 
protection.

--- page 34 ---
34 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
v. DOE/EH-0173T, Environmental Regulatory Guide for Radiological Effluent 
Monitoring and Environmental Surveillance, dated 1-91, which identifies those 
monitoring and surveillance elements that are considered high priorities for a 
radiological effluent monitoring and environmental surveillance program. 
w. EH-412-0014/1099, Information Brief: The Long-Term Control of Property: 
Overview of Requirements in Orders DOE 5400.1 & DOE 5400.5, dated 10-99, 
which summarizes DOE requirements for radiation protection of the public and 
environment to assist DOE elements plan and implement programs for long-term 
control (stewardship) of property. 
x. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Health Physics Society (HPS), 
1999. ANSI/HPS N.13-12-1999, Surface and Volume Radioactivity Standards for 
Clearance, which contains recommendations on clearance of solid materials. 
y. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Health Physics Society (HPS), 
2009. ANSI/HPS N 13.53-2009, Control and Release of Technologically 
Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (TENORM), which contains 
recommendations on control of TENORM. 
z. International Atomic Energy Agency, Safety Standards Series No. RS-G-1.7, 
2004. Application of the Concepts of Exclusion, Exemption and Clearance, which 
contains recommendations for exemption of radioactive materials from 
administrative controls. 
aa. International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) Publication 60, 
1991, 1990 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection, Ann. ICRP Vol. 21(1-3), which provides recommendations regarding 
the fundamental principles of radiation protection. It specifically was used as a 
basis for radiation and tissue weighting factors in 10 CFR Part 835 and is 
considered here for consistency with other DOE regulations. 
bb. ICRP Publication 101, 2006, Assessing Dose of the Representative Person for the 
Purpose of Radiation Protection of the Public and the Optimisation of 
Radiological Protection, Ann. ICRP Vol. 36(3), provides bases for the 
development of ‘reference person’ and ‘representative person.’ 
cc. ICRP Publication 103, 2007, 2007 Recommendations of the International 
Commission on Radiological Protection, Ann. ICRP Vol. 37(2-4), which provides 
the most recent ICRP recommendations regarding the fundamental principles of 
radiation protection. Concepts presented in this edition, such as 'reference person' 
and 'representative person' were used in this directive. 
dd. Interagency Steering Committee on Radiation Standards (ISCORS), Federal 
Institutional Control Requirements for Radioactive Waste and Restricted Release 
of Property Containing Radioactive Material, dated 12-99, which tabulates

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 458.1 35 
2-11-2011  
 
 
regulatory requirements for disposal of radioactive waste and restricted release of 
sites containing radioactive material for the Environmental Protection Agency, the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Department of Energy. 
ee. ISCORS Technical Report 2004-02 (DOE/EH-0676), RESRAD-BIOTA: A Tool 
for Implementing a Graded Approach to Biota Dose Evaluation, User’s Guide, 
Version 1, dated 1-04, which presents a User’s Guide for the RESRAD-BIOTA 
code.  The RESRAD-BIOTA code provides a complete spectrum of biota dose 
evaluation capabilities, from methods for general screening, to comprehensive 
receptor-specific dose estimation. 
ff. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) Report No. 
116, Limitation of Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, dated 3-93, which provides 
recommendations on specific dose limit criteria and methods of demonstrating 
compliance with the dose limits. 
gg. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission NUREG-1575, Rev. 1 Multi-Agency 
Radiation Survey and Site Investigation Manual (MARSSIM), Revision 1, 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 402-R-97-016, Rev. 1, DOE/EH-0624, 
Rev. 1, dated 8-00, which provides comprehensive guidance on planning, 
conducting, assessing and documenting radiological surveys of sites with 
radioactive contaminants in surface soil and on building surfaces with a specific 
focus on the final status surveys that are carried out to demonstrate compliance 
with cleanup regulations. 
hh. NUREG-1576, EPA 402-B-04-001A, Multi-Agency Radiological Laboratory 
Analytical Protocols Manual (MARLAP), Vol. 1-3, National Technical 
Information Service Publication (NTIS PB) 2004-105421, dated 7-04, which 
provides guidance for the planning, implementation and assessment phases of 
projects involving laboratory analysis of radionuclides to ensure the generation of 
consistent and comparable data projects and programs and to ensure that 
laboratory data meet project-specific data quality objectives. 
ii. NUREG-1575, Supp. 1 Multi-Agency Radiation Survey and Assessment of 
Materials and Equipment Manual (MARSAME), EPA 402-R-09-001, 
DOE/HS-004, dated 1-09, which is a multi-agency consensus document that 
supplements the Multi-Agency Radiation Survey and Site Investigation Manual 
(MARSSIM) by providing information on planning, conducting, evaluating, and 
documenting radiological disposition surveys for the assessment of materials and 
equipment. 
jj. Yu, C., D.J. LePoire, J.-J. Cheng, E. Gnanapragasam, S. Kamboj, J.Arnish, B.M. 
Biwer, A.J. Zielen, A. Wallo III, W.A. Williams, and H. T. Peterson, Jr., User’s 
Manual for RESRAD-BUILD Version 3, dated June 2003, which provides 
documentation for RESRAD-BUILD, a computer code used to evaluate potential

--- page 36 ---
36 DOE O 458.1 
 2-11-2011 
 
 
health impacts in buildings contaminated with radioactive materials, and available 
at: http://web.ead.anl.gov/resrad/. 
kk. Yu, C., A.J. Zielen, J.-J. Cheng, D.J. LePoire, E. Gnanapragasam, S. Kamboj, A. 
Wallo III, W.A. Williams, and H. Peterson, User’s Manual for RESRAD Version 
6, dated July 2001, which provides documentation for the RESRAD pathway 
analysis computer code available at: http://web.ead.anl.gov/resrad/. 
ll. 10 CFR Part 20, Standards for Protection Against Radiation, which establishes 
standards for protection against ionizing radiation resulting from activities 
conducted by NRC licensees. 
mm. 10 CFR Part 770, Transfer of Real Property at Defense Nuclear Facilities for 
Economic Development, which establishes a process for disposing of unneeded 
real property at DOE’s defense nuclear facilities for economic development 
purposes. 
nn. 10 CFR Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection, which establishes radiation 
protection standards, limits, and program requirements for protecting individuals 
from ionizing radiation resulting from the conduct of DOE activities. 
oo. 40 CFR Part 61, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants. 
Subpart H applies to the emissions of radionuclides other than radon from DOE 
facilities. Subpart Q applies to radon emissions from DOE facilities. Subpart T 
applies to radon emissions from the disposal of uranium mill tailings. Subpart A 
contains General Provisions. 
pp. 40 CFR Part 141, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations which prescribes 
radionuclide concentration limits for public drinking water. 
qq. 40 CFR Part 191, Environmental Radiation Protection Standards for 
Management and Disposal of Spent Nuclear Fuel, High-Level and Transuranic 
Radioactive Wastes which establishes requirements for the management and 
disposal of spent nuclear fuel, high-level, and transuranic wastes. 
rr. 41 CFR Chapter 109, Department of Energy Property Management Regulations, 
which establishes uniform DOE property management policies, regulations, and 
procedures that implement and supplement the Federal Property Management 
Regulations.  
8. DEFINITIONS. See Attachment 2. 
9. CONTACT. Questions concerning this Order should be referred to the Office of 
Environmental Protection, Sustainability Support and Corporate Safety Analysis at (202) 
586-7870.

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 458.1 37 
2-11-2011  
 
 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
MARK W. MENEZES 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 38 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 458.1 Chg. 5, RADIATION PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC AND THE 
ENVIRONMENT 
The provisions of this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) apply to all radiological 
activities conducted by Department of Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear Security 
Administration (NNSA) contractors. 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD and flowing down the CRD requirements to subcontractors at any tier 
to the extent necessary to ensure contractor compliance with the requirements. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
a. The contractor must establish and implement a program to protect the public and 
the environment against undue risk from radiation associated with DOE 
radiological activities through application of the Specific Requirements (paragraph 
2.) in this CRD. 
b. The contractor must provide a schedule for full implementation of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD as directed by DOE. 
c. The contractor must develop documentation that demonstrates how the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD are implemented. 
d. The contractor must obtain DOE line management approval of the documentation 
demonstrating compliance with the Specific Requirements in this CRD. 
2. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Environmental Radiological Protection Program. The contractor conducting 
radiological activities must develop and implement a documented program which 
addresses compliance with the Specific Requirements in this CRD that are 
relevant to the particular activities being conducted.  
(1) The program, (documented by the contractor’s plans, procedures, 
protocols and other documents developed to implement the relevant 
requirements of this CRD) must be tailored to these activities and reflect a 
graded approach commensurate with the hazard or risk to the public and 
the environment resulting from the DOE operations. 
(2) Where long-term stewardship and institutional controls for protection of 
the public and the environment are necessary to meet the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD, the contractor must ensure that the need for the 
controls is documented and maintained and to the extent the contractor is 
responsible, implement the controls. If the contractor is not responsible for 
implementation of the controls, the contractor must provide reasonable

--- page 39 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-2 2-11-2011 
 
 
assurance that necessary controls are being implemented by the 
responsible party prior to conducting activities that can affect the public or 
the environment. 
b. Public Dose Limit. The contractor must establish and implement procedures and 
practices to address the following elements related to the public dose limit: 
(1) DOE radiological activities, including remedial actions and activities 
using Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive 
Material (TENORM), must be conducted so that exposure of members of 
the public to ionizing radiation will: 
(a) Not cause a total effective dose (TED) exceeding 100 mrem 
(1mSv) in a year, an equivalent dose to the lens of the eye 
exceeding 1500 mrem (15 mSv) in a year, or an equivalent dose to 
the skin or extremities exceeding 5000 mrem (50 mSv) in a year, 
from all sources of ionizing radiation and exposure pathways that 
could contribute significantly to the total dose excepting: 
1 Dose from radon and its decay products in air [Radon is 
addressed separately e.g., under paragraphs 2.f. and 2.h. of 
the Specific Requirements in this CRD and under Title 40 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 61, Subparts Q 
and T]; 
2 Dose received by patients from medical sources of 
radiation, and by volunteers in medical research programs;  
3 Dose from background radiation; and 
4 Dose from occupational exposure under Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) or Agreement State license 
or to general employees regulated under 10 CFR Part 835, 
and  
(b) Comply with As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) 
requirements in paragraph 2.d. of the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD. 
(2) The public dose limit applies to members of the public located off DOE 
sites and on DOE sites outside of controlled areas, and to those exposed to 
residual radioactive material subsequent to any remedial action or 
clearance of property. 
c. Temporary Dose Limits. If special circumstances could affect a DOE 
radiological activity in such a manner that the potential dose to a member of the 
public could exceed a TED of 100 mrem (1 mSv) in a year the contractor must

--- page 40 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-3 
 
 
submit a request for specific authorization for a temporary public dose limit 
higher than 100 mrem (1 mSv) in a year to the responsible Field Element 
Manager. This request must include documentation that justifies the need for 
the increase, the alternatives considered, and the application of the ALARA 
process. The specific exposure pathways excepted in paragraphs 2.b.(1)(a) 1-4 
of the Specific Requirements in this CRD are also excepted for temporary dose 
limits. 
d. As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA). 
(1) An ALARA process must be implemented to optimize control and 
management of radiological activities so that doses to members of the 
public (both individual and collective) and releases to the environment 
are kept as low as reasonably achievable. The process must be applied 
to the design or modification of facilities and conduct of activities that 
can expose the public or the environment to radiation or radioactive 
material. 
(2) The ALARA process must: consider DOE sources, modes of exposure and 
all pathways which potentially could result in the release of radioactive 
material into the environment, or exposure to the public; use a graded 
approach; and, to the extent practical and when appropriate, be 
coordinated with the 10 CFR Part 835 ALARA process. 
e. Demonstrating Compliance with the Public Dose Limit. The contractor must 
establish and implement procedures and practices to demonstrate compliance with 
the public dose limit and to address the following elements: 
(1) Dose evaluations to demonstrate compliance with the public dose limit in 
paragraph 2.b.(1) of the Specific Requirements in this CRD and assess 
collective dose must include the following: 
(a) The TED to members of the public from exposure to radiation, 
airborne effluents, and liquid effluents, of DOE origin. 
1 Compliance may be demonstrated by calculating dose to 
the representative person or to the maximally exposed 
individual (MEI). 
2 Determination of the representative person or the MEI must 
include members of the public both on DOE sites outside of 
controlled areas and off DOE sites. 
3 If it is suspected that any of the dose limits specified in 
paragraph 2.b.(1)(a) of the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD may be exceeded or the estimated TED for members 
of the public exceeds 25 mrem (0.25 mSv) in a year, then

--- page 41 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-4 2-11-2011 
 
 
dose to the lens of the eye, skin, and extremities must be 
evaluated.  
(b) Analytical models that consider likely exposure pathways, such as: 
1 Direct external radiation from sources located on-site; 
2 External radiation from airborne radioactive material; 
3 External radiation from radioactive material deposited on 
surfaces off-site; 
4 Internal radiation from inhaled airborne radioactive 
material; 
5 Internal radiation from radioactive material ingested with 
water, and with food from terrestrial crops or animal 
products (e.g., meat, eggs, milk);  
6 Internal radiation from radioactive material ingested with 
aquatic food products such as fish, shellfish, crustaceans 
(e.g., crayfish, shrimp, crab, lobsters), and aquatic plants 
and algae; 
7 External or internal radiation due to residual radioactive 
material on, or in, cleared real property; and 
8 Any other pathway unique to the DOE site or activity. 
(c) The dose to members of the public from DOE-related exposure 
sources only, if the projected DOE-related dose to the 
representative person or MEI is 25 mrem (0.25mSv) in a year or 
less. If the DOE-related dose is greater than 25 mrem in a year, the 
dose to members of the public must include both major non-DOE 
sources of exposure (excluding dose from radon and its decay 
products in air, background radiation dose, occupational doses and 
doses due to medical exposures) and dose from DOE-related 
sources; 
(d) Collective dose for members of the public resulting from 
radiation emitted and radioactive materials released from DOE 
radiological activities only (not including radon and its decay 
products). Collective dose for members of the public must be 
representative of the total dose and of adequate quality for 
supported comparisons, trending or decisions. Consistent with the 
graded approach, collective dose estimates may be truncated by 
distance (e.g., 50 miles) or individual dose level (e.g., 10 
microrem) when integration of doses beyond such thresholds does

--- page 42 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-5 
 
 
not significantly affect data quality objectives. Where it is of 
concern, collective dose for members of the public resulting from 
radon and its decay products released by DOE radiological 
activities needs to be calculated separately from other 
radionuclides.  
(2) The estimated individual dose to the MEI or representative person that is 
representative of the persons or group likely to receive the most dose and 
is based on pathway and exposure parameters that are not likely to 
underestimate or substantially overestimate the dose, and, the collective 
dose (population dose) that is a realistic as practicable estimate of the 
sum of the doses to all members of the actual exposed population. 
(3) Site-specific information on radiation source dispersion patterns, location 
and demography of members of the public in the vicinity of DOE 
radiological activities, land use, food supplies, and exposure pathway 
information must be updated, as necessary, to document significant 
changes that could affect dose evaluations.  
(4) Values of assumed default or site-specific parameters used in 
calculations must be identified and included with the documentation of the 
calculations. 
(5) Direct measurements must be made, to the extent practicable, to obtain 
information characterizing source terms, exposures, exposure modes, and 
other information needed in evaluating dose.  
(6) Models for dose evaluation calculations must be appropriate for their 
purpose.  Dose evaluation models that are codified or approved for use 
by regulators of DOE or by DOE must be used where applicable.  
Alternatives to such codified or approved dose evaluation models to be 
used for demonstrating compliance must be approved by the Field 
Element Manager. 
(7) DOE-approved dose coefficients must be used to evaluate doses resulting 
from DOE radiological activities. Use of alternative dose coefficients 
must be approved by the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer or by 
a Cognizant Secretarial Officer in consultation with the Chief Health, 
Safety and Security Officer.  
(8) Doses to members of the public from airborne effluents must be 
evaluated with the CAP-88 model or another EPA-approved model or 
method to demonstrate compliance with applicable subparts of 
40 CFR Part 61, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air 
Pollutants.

--- page 43 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-6 2-11-2011 
 
 
(9) Environmental monitoring must be conducted to characterize routine and 
non-routine releases of radioactive material from radiological activities, 
estimate the dispersal pattern in the environs, characterize the pathway(s) 
of exposure to members of the public and estimate the doses to 
individuals and populations in the vicinity of the site or operation 
commensurate with the nature of the DOE radiological activities and the 
risk to the public and the environment. Radiological monitoring must be 
integrated with the general environmental and effluent monitoring. 
Environmental monitoring must include, but is not limited to: 
(a) Effluent Monitoring 
(b) Environmental Surveillance 
(c) Meteorological Monitoring. Meteorological monitoring must be 
commensurate with the level of site radiological activities, the site 
topographical characteristics, and the distance to critical 
receptors. The scope must be sufficient to characterize 
atmospheric dispersion and model the dose to members of the 
public over distances commensurate with the magnitude of 
potential source terms and possible pathways to the atmosphere. 
(d) Pre-operational Monitoring. Prior to the startup of a new site, 
facility or process with the potential to expose the public or 
environment to radiation or radioactive material, it is necessary to 
ensure that adequate knowledge exists to understand: 1) 
radiological background; 2) pertinent environmental and 
ecological parameters; and 3) potential pathways for human 
exposures or ecological/natural resource impacts either from 
existing data or documents (for example, NEPA evaluations or 
existing monitoring and surveillance programs, etc.) or from the 
conduct of a pre-operational study initiated at least one year prior 
to startup of a new operation. 
(10) Site-specific environmental monitoring criteria must be established to 
ensure that representative measurements of quantities and concentrations 
of radiological contaminants are conducted and that the effects from 
DOE radiological activities on members of the public and the 
environment are monitored sufficiently to demonstrate compliance with 
the Specific Requirements in this CRD. 
f. Airborne Radioactive Effluents. The contractor must establish and implement 
procedures and practices related to airborne radioactive effluents so that 
radiological activities are conducted in a manner such that the release of 
radioactive material to the atmosphere will:

--- page 44 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-7 
 
 
(1) Be evaluated using the ALARA process established in paragraph 2.d. of 
the Specific Requirements in this CRD; 
(2) Not cause radon-222 flux rates to exceed 20 pCi (0.7 Bq)/m2-sec 
averaged over the surface area overlaying waste, including the covering 
or other confinement structures, wherever radium-226 wastes are 
accepted for storage or disposal (See 40 CFR Part 61, Subparts Q and T);  
(3) Meet compliance agreements under 40 CFR Part 61, Subparts H, Q, and 
T;  
(4) Not cause the radon-220 and radon-222 decay product concentration, 
including background, to exceed 0.03 WL in buildings that are being 
released from DOE control. Further, a reasonable effort must be made to 
meet a 0.02WL generic guideline for annual average radon-220 and 
radon-222 decay product concentration, including background, in such 
buildings; and 
(5) Not exceed 3 pCi/L annual average radon-220 and radon-222 
concentration, not including background, at the site boundary if DOE 
activities release radon-220 and radon-222 or their decay products. 
g. Control and Management of Radionuclides from DOE Activities in Liquid 
Discharges. The contractor must establish and implement procedures and 
practices related to control and management of radionuclides from DOE 
activities in liquid discharges. Operators of DOE facilities discharging or 
releasing liquids containing radionuclides from DOE activities must: 
(1) Characterize planned and unplanned releases of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities, consistent with the potential for 
on- and off-site impacts, and provide an assessment of radiological 
consequences as necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Specific 
Requirements of this CRD. 
(2) Comply with the ALARA process requirements in paragraph 2.d. of the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD. 
(3) Conduct activities to ensure that liquid releases containing radionuclides 
from DOE activities are managed in a manner that protects ground water 
resources now and in the future, based on use and value considerations. 
(4) Conduct activities to ensure that liquid discharges containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities do not exceed an annual average (at 
the point of discharge) of either of the following: 
(a) 5 pCi (0.2 Bq) per gram above background of settleable solids for 
alpha-emitting radionuclides.

--- page 45 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-8 2-11-2011 
 
 
(b) 50 pCi (2 Bq) per gram above background of settleable solids for 
beta-gamma-emitting radionuclides. 
(5) Except for tritium and sanitary sewers, apply Best Available Technology 
(BAT) if at the point of discharge: 
(a) The annual average concentration of a given radionuclide is 
greater than the DOE-approved derived concentration standard 
(DCS) value for water contained in the Derived Concentration 
Technical Standard, DOE-STD-1196-2011, or for multiple 
radionuclides, the composite DCS must be the sum of the 
fractional DCS values derived from DOE-approved DCS values; 
(b) The discharge contributes greater than 10 mrem (0.1 mSv) annual 
TED to members of the public; or  
(c) The collective dose from all DOE sources is greater than 100 
person-rem (1 person-Sv) and the liquid discharge contributes 50 
percent or more of this collective dose. 
(6) Control releases of tritium in a manner that has been established by 
application of the ALARA process. 
(7) Conduct radiological activities to ensure that radionuclides from DOE 
activities contained in liquid effluents do not cause private or public 
drinking water systems to exceed the drinking water maximum 
contaminant levels in 40 CFR Part 141, National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations.  
(8) Control discharges into sanitary sewers in accordance with the following 
requirements: 
(a) Except for excreta from patients and medical research volunteers 
treated with radioactive material, discharges of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities into non-Federally owned 
sanitary sewers are prohibited unless: 
1 The material is readily soluble (or readily dispersed 
biological materials) in water; 
2 Such discharges comply with ALARA process 
requirements; 
3 BAT is applied to discharges of liquid releases containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities if the average monthly 
concentration level at the point of discharge into the 
sanitary sewer is greater than five times the DOE-approved

--- page 46 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-9 
 
 
DCS values for ingestion except for tritium which is 
addressed under paragraph 2.g.(6); 
4 Releases do not result in an annual discharge (above 
background) into sanitary sewers in excess of 5 Ci (185 
GBq) of tritium; 1 Ci (37 GBq) carbon-14 or 1 Ci (37 GBq) 
of all other radionuclides combined; 
5 DOE operations are conducted to minimize long-term 
buildup of radionuclides in the sewage treatment plants that 
may create handling and disposal issues or interfere with 
plant operations; 
6 The contractor notifies the responsible Field Element 
Manager of unusual discharges to sanitary sewers from 
DOE facilities;  
7 The contractor prepares and provides a report that describes 
and summarizes such discharges to sanitary sewers to the 
responsible Field Element Manager at least annually; and 
8 Existing agreements, contracts, statements of understanding 
or other formal arrangements with other agencies 
concerning the discharge of liquids containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities to sanitary sewers are 
not violated. 
(b) DOE facilities discharging liquids containing radionuclides from 
DOE activities into sanitary sewer systems owned by the Federal 
government are not subject to the requirements in paragraph 
2.g.(8)(a) of the Specific Requirements in this CRD if: 
1 The system provides treatment in accordance with the 
environmental radiological protection program and 
2 Sludge from the system is disposed of in accordance with 
the Specific Requirements in this CRD and applicable 
Federal, State, and municipal regulations. 
(9) Prohibit the use of soil columns.  
(10) Manage the disposition of non-process water potentially containing 
radionuclides from DOE activities to protect soil and ground water and 
prevent the creation of future cleanup sites. 
(11) Ensure that storm water runoff containing radionuclides from DOE 
activities is considered, as appropriate, as a pathway of exposure that has 
the potential for on- and off-site impacts. Using a graded approach, the

--- page 47 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-10 2-11-2011 
 
 
receiving ecosystem including, but not limited to, wetlands, floodplains, 
streams, ponds, basins and lakes must be monitored to evaluate human or 
ecological impacts when warranted based on site specific risk. 
h. Radioactive Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel. The contractor must establish and 
implement procedures and practices to ensure that management, storage and 
disposal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel on DOE sites address the 
following elements: 
(1) Radiological activities must be conducted in a manner such that radiation 
exposure to members of the public from management and storage of 
radioactive waste complies with ALARA process requirements and does 
not result in a TED greater than 25 mrem (0.25 mSv) in a year from all 
exposure pathways and radiation sources associated with the waste, except 
for transportation and radon and its decay products. 
(2) Management of spent nuclear fuel, and high-level and transuranic wastes 
at a disposal facility which is not regulated by the NRC must comply with 
the requirements of this CRD and 40 CFR Part 191, Environmental 
Radiation Protection Standards for Management and Disposal of Spent 
Nuclear Fuel, High-level and Transuranic Radioactive Wastes. 
(3) Management, storage and disposal of low-level radioactive waste must be 
conducted in a manner such that exposure to members of the public to 
radiation from radioactive waste complies with ALARA process 
requirements, and does not exceed a TED of 25 mrem (0.25 mSv) in a 
year from all exposure pathways and radiation sources associated with the 
waste, except for transportation and radon and its decay products. 
(4) Management, storage and disposal of 11e.(2) byproduct material, as 
defined in Section 11e.(2) of the AEA and other wastes containing 
uranium and thorium and their decay products which are not subject to the 
requirements of 40 CFR Part 192, Health and Environmental Protection 
Standards for Uranium and Thorium Mill Tailings, are not at facilities 
licensed by the NRC, or are not disposed of at DOE low-level waste 
disposal facilities, must be in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph 2.h. of the Specific Requirements in this CRD and 
DOE-approved plans. 
(a) Disposal facilities for uranium and thorium wastes must be 
designed to: 
1 Remain effective for 1,000 years, to the extent 
reasonably achievable, and, in any case, for at least 200 
years, and

--- page 48 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-11 
 
 
2 Provide reasonable assurance that releases of radon-222 
to the atmosphere will not:  
a Exceed an average release rate of 20 picocuries 
per square meter per second or  
b Increase the annual average concentration of 
radon-222 in air at or above any location outside 
the disposal site by more than one-half picocurie 
per liter. 
(b) For wastes containing significant concentrations of radium and 
thorium, special considerations must be given to measures to 
prevent inadvertent human intrusion. 
(c) Before any potentially biodegradable contaminated wastes are 
placed in a disposal facility, such wastes must be conditioned so 
that the generation and escape of biogenic gases will not cause the 
emission or dose limits in paragraph 2.h. of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD to be exceeded and that bio-degradation 
within the facility will not result in premature structural failure. 
(d) All plans for the management and disposal of these wastes must 
provide for institutional controls and long-term stewardship of the 
disposal facility necessary to ensure continued performance. 
(5) Discrete sources of radium-226, accelerator produced radioactive material, 
or naturally-occurring radioactive material (NORM) that pose a threat 
similar to discrete sources of radium-226, which are defined as Section 
11e.(3) or 11e.(4) byproduct material in the AEA, must be managed as 
high-level waste, low-level waste or 11e.(2) material as appropriate under 
DOE AEA authorities and in compliance with the Specific Requirements 
in this CRD and the requirements in the CRD to DOE O 435.1, current 
version. 
i. Protection of Drinking Water and Ground Water. 
(1) The contractor must establish and implement procedures and practices to 
ensure that DOE sites provide a level of radiation protection for persons 
consuming water from a drinking water system operated by DOE, directly 
or through a DOE contractor, which is equivalent to that provided to 
members of the public by the community drinking water standards of 
40 CFR Part 141, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (that is, 
not exceed the radionuclide maximum contaminant levels (MCLs)). 
(2) The contractor must protect ground water from radiological contamination 
to ensure compliance with dose limits in the Specific Requirements in this

--- page 49 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-12 2-11-2011 
 
 
CRD and consistent with ALARA process requirements. To that end the 
contractor must ensure that: 
(a) Baseline conditions of the ground water quantity and quality are 
documented; 
(b) Possible sources of, and potential for, radiological contamination 
are identified and assessed; 
(c) Strategies to control radiological contamination are documented 
and implemented; 
(d) Monitoring methodologies are documented and implemented; and 
(e) Ground water monitoring activities are integrated with other 
environmental monitoring activities. 
j. Protection of Biota. The contractor must establish and implement procedures and 
practices to ensure that biota are protected and to address the following 
elements: 
(1) Radiological activities that have the potential to impact the environment 
must be conducted in a manner that protects populations of aquatic 
animals, terrestrial plants, and terrestrial animals in local ecosystems from 
adverse effects due to radiation and radioactive material released from 
DOE operations. 
(2) When actions taken to protect humans from radiation and radioactive 
materials are not adequate to protect biota then evaluations must be done 
to demonstrate compliance with paragraph 2.j.(1) of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD in one or more of the following ways:  
(a) Use DOE-STD-1153-2002, A Graded Approach for Evaluating 
Radiation Doses to Aquatic and Terrestrial Biota. 
(b) Use an alternative approach to demonstrate that the dose rates to 
representative biota populations do not exceed the dose rate criteria 
in DOE-STD-1153-2002, Table 2.2.  
(c) Use an ecological risk assessment to demonstrate that radiation and 
radioactive material released from DOE operations will not 
adversely affect populations within the ecosystem. 
k. Release and Clearance of Property. The contractor must establish and implement 
procedures and practices to ensure that release or clearance of property with the 
potential to contain residual radioactive material must be conducted in accordance

--- page 50 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-13 
 
 
with DOE direction and in accordance with the requirements in paragraph 2.k. of 
the Specific Requirements in this CRD4. 
(1) Property control and clearance processes must be developed and 
implemented in accordance with the dose limits in paragraph 2.b of the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD under any plausible use of the property 
and the ALARA process requirements in paragraph 2.d of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD must be met before property is cleared. 
(2) Dose Constraints. Unless alternative dose constraints are approved by 
issuance of a directive or memorandum by the Chief Health, Safety and 
Security Officer or for NNSA, the Cognizant Secretarial Officer in 
consultation with the Chief Health, Safety and Security Officer, the 
following dose constraints for DOE residual radioactive material must be 
applied to each specific clearance of property for any actual or likely 
future use of the property: 
(a) Real property – a TED of 25 mrem (0.25 mSv) above background 
in any calendar year; 
(b) Personal property - a TED of 1 mrem (0.01 mSv) above 
background in any calendar year. 
(3) Residual Radioactive Material. Property potentially containing residual 
radioactive material must not be cleared from DOE control unless either: 
(a) The property is demonstrated not to contain residual radioactive 
material based on process and historical knowledge, radiological 
monitoring or surveys, or a combination of these; or 
(b) The property is evaluated and appropriately monitored or surveyed 
to determine: 
1 The types and quantities of residual radioactive material 
within the property; 
2 The quantities of removable and total residual radioactive 
material on property surfaces (including residual 
radioactive material present on and under any coating);  
3 That for property with potentially contaminated surfaces 
that are difficult to access for radiological monitoring or 
                                                 
4 In addition to paragraph 2.k of the Specific Requirements in this CRD, the following may have applicable 
requirements regarding clearance of property: 41 CFR Chapter 109, Department of Energy Property Management 
Regulations; DOE O 430.1, Real Property Asset Management, current version.

--- page 51 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-14 2-11-2011 
 
 
surveys, an evaluation of residual radioactive material on 
such surfaces is performed which is: 
a Based on process and historical knowledge meeting 
the requirements of paragraph 2.k.(5) of the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD and monitoring 
and or surveys, to the extent feasible and 
b Sufficient to demonstrate that applicable specific or 
pre-approved DOE Authorized Limits will not be 
exceeded; and 
4 That any residual radioactive material within or on the 
property is in compliance with applicable specific or 
pre-approved DOE Authorized Limits. 
(4) Evaluation of the Need for Maintaining Institutional Controls for Real 
Property. Real property under evaluation for clearance from DOE 
radiological controls must be evaluated against the need for maintaining 
institutional controls or impacting long-term stewardship of adjacent DOE 
real property. In situations where transfer of the real property to other use 
would impact long-term radiological protection of adjacent DOE 
properties, it must be demonstrated that the impact of the property 
clearance would not result in noncompliance for the adjacent property 
with the requirements of applicable statutes, regulations or DOE 
directives. 
(5) Process and Historical Knowledge. Contractors responsible for 
radiological clearance of property, when they rely in part, on process 
knowledge as a basis for clearance decisions, must establish a documented 
evaluation process, using a graded approach, for applying process and 
historical knowledge to determine if property potentially contains residual 
radioactive material. 
(a) This process must include procedures for evaluating operational 
records and operating history, including the use of any radioactive 
materials or radiation generating devices. 
(b) For real property, this process must address each specific property 
individually. If several parcels of land are contiguous, or if several 
structures are located in the same area and have a common 
operational history, a single evaluation for all of the properties is 
acceptable. 
(c) If available process and historical knowledge cannot demonstrate 
that property does not contain residual radioactive materials,

--- page 52 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-15 
 
 
radiological monitoring or surveys must be conducted to 
supplement process and historical knowledge evaluations. 
(d) If not supplemented by radiological surveys, process and historical 
knowledge evaluations must be adequate to determine: 
1 Whether the property has ever been used for radiological 
activities or in areas that could have resulted in the 
presence of residual radioactive material within or on the 
property, or 
2 Whether property formerly containing residual radioactive 
material has been decontaminated and demonstrated to 
meet DOE Authorized Limits, and has not been used in a 
manner or in areas that could have resulted in the 
re-contamination of the property. 
(e) For property that is determined to potentially contain residual 
radioactive material under paragraph 2.k.(5)(d)1 of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD or determined to be re-contaminated 
under paragraph 2.k.(5)(d)2 of the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD, the process and historical knowledge evaluation must also 
include an assessment of the types and quantities of residual 
radioactive material and the sources and pathways by which the 
property became contaminated.  
(6) Authorized Limits. 
(a) Authorized Limits for the clearance of any property with residual 
radioactive material must provide reasonable assurance that the 
requirements of paragraphs 2.k.(1) and 2.k.(2) of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD are met. Authorized Limits may be 
applied to property for which process knowledge cannot establish 
the absence of residual radioactive material and in which the 
presence of residual radioactive material cannot be determined. 
(b) Authorized Limits must:  
1 Be developed in accordance with the ALARA requirements 
in paragraph 2.d. of the Specific Requirements in this CRD. 
2 Be based on the applicable dose constraint, supported by a 
complete exposure pathway analysis using appropriate 
methodologies, techniques, parameters and models (such as 
the RESRAD family of codes) that meet DOE quality

--- page 53 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-16 2-11-2011 
 
 
assurance requirements under the CRD to DOE O 414.1, 
Quality Assurance, current version. 
3 Be expressed in terms of concentration of radioactivity per 
unit surface area (e.g., dpm per 100 cm2), radioactivity per 
unit mass (e.g., pCi per gram) or volume (e.g., pCi per ml), 
total radioactivity, or DOE controls and restrictions, if 
applicable. 
4 Explicitly state any restrictions or conditions on future use 
of the property necessary to ensure the basic dose limit and 
applicable dose constraint are not exceeded. 
5 In addition to paragraphs 2.k.(6)(b)1-4 of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD for clearance of personal 
property only: 
a Be based on expected annual quantity of property to 
be cleared or 
b Be based on expected total amount of property 
cleared over the life of the project for specific 
remedial action or decontamination and 
decommissioning projects and 
c Prior to clearance of metals, the contractor must 
provide the necessary information to support a 
determination by the Field Element Manager that 
there is no practical internal DOE opportunity for 
reuse or recycle of the material or equipment. 
6 Authorized limits must be submitted to the Field Element 
Manager to obtain DOE approval. 
(c) Applications for DOE approval of Authorized Limits must contain 
the following: 
1 A description of the property. 
2 Specific limits proposed for each radionuclide or group of 
radionuclides and/or external radiation exposure, surrogate 
metrics, or conditions used to limit radionuclides. 
3 Potential collective dose to the exposed population and the 
potential dose to a member of the public most likely to

--- page 54 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-17 
 
 
receive the highest dose for both: actual or likely future 
use, and plausible future use of the property. 
4 ALARA assessments conducted under paragraph 2.d. of the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD for the proposed 
clearance action to include, at a minimum, the effects of: 
a Implementing the proposed Authorized Limits; 
b Implementing alternative levels of residual 
radioactive material instead of the proposed 
Authorized Limits; 
c Not implementing the proposed Authorized Limits, 
i.e., not proceeding with the proposed clearance 
action. 
5 A description of the procedures and radiological 
monitoring or surveys to be used to demonstrate 
compliance with proposed limits. 
6 Identification of any restrictions or conditions on the future 
use of the property upon which the proposed limits are 
based, and the means by which the restrictions or 
conditions will be implemented and maintained. 
7 An estimated date for when the property will be cleared and 
an estimate of when the property will be released from 
DOE control. 5 
(d) Property covered by Authorized Limits is subject to 10 CFR Part 
835 requirements unless the criteria in paragraphs 2.k.(6)(a) 
through (c) of the Specific Requirements in this CRD have been 
met and the Authorized Limits have been approved by a Cognizant 
Secretarial Officer in consultation with the Chief Health, Safety 
and Security Officer as required by the 10 CFR Part 835 exclusion. 
(e) Revision of Authorized Limits. If established Authorized Limits 
are found to be not protective, appropriate or practical to apply for 
a specific type or portion of property, further clearance for that 
                                                 
5 This information is needed to support the DOE expectation stated at 72 FR 31904, 31906 (10 CFR Part 835, June 
8, 2007) that the material, equipment, or real property to which the 10 CFR Part 835.1(b)(6) exclusion is applied 
will be released from DOE control according to a specified time interval.

--- page 55 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-18 2-11-2011 
 
 
specific type or portion of property must not proceed without 
revised Authorized Limits. 
1 An application for revised Authorized Limits must be 
submitted in accordance with the requirements in 
paragraphs 2.k.(6)(a) through (d) of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD. 
2 In addition to the requirements of applicable paragraphs of 
2.k.(6) of the Specific Requirements in this CRD, requests 
for approval of revised Authorized Limits must include a 
justification for the need for the revised Authorized Limits. 
Justifications for revised Authorized Limits must be based 
upon one of the following: 
a Complying with existing Authorized Limits would 
pose a clear and present risk of injury to general 
employees or members of the public; or 
b Complying with existing Authorized Limits, would 
produce environmental harm (e.g., destruction of 
artifacts, ecological damage, loss of cultural assets) 
that is clearly excessive compared to the potential 
health benefits to persons exposed to affected 
properties; or  
c Complying with existing Authorized Limits is 
unreasonably costly relative to long-term benefits 
and where the residual radioactive material does not 
pose a clear present or future potential of exceeding 
the public dose limit of paragraph 2.b. of the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD; or  
d Portions of the project or activity for which the 
scenarios or assumptions used to establish the 
existing Authorized Limits are overly conservative, 
or where more appropriate scenarios or assumptions 
indicate that other limits are applicable or 
appropriate for protection of the public and the 
environment; or 
e New information which indicates the existing 
Authorized Limits are not sufficient to meet the 
protective requirements established by DOE. 
(f) Pre-Approved Authorized Limits.

--- page 56 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-19 
 
 
1 The following values have been pre-approved by DOE for 
use as Authorized Limits, and may be used as specified 
below instead of developing specific Authorized Limits. 
a For radium-226 and radium-228 in soil - 5 pCi/gram 
(0.2 Bq/gram) in excess of background levels, 
averaged over 100 m2, in the first 15 cm depth of 
the surface layer of soil; and 15 pCi/gram (0.56 
Bq/gram) in excess of background levels, averaged 
over any subsequent 15 cm subsurface layer of soil 
plus an ALARA assessment. If both thorium-230 
and radium-226 or both thorium-232 and 
radium-228 are present and not in secular 
equilibrium, the appropriate pre-approved limit 
must be applied to the radionuclide with the higher 
concentration. 
b Previously approved guidelines and limits (such as 
the surface activity guidelines) may continue to be 
applied and used as Pre-Approved Authorized 
Limits until they are replaced or revised by 
Pre-Approved Authorized Limits issued by the 
Department. 
2 Pre-Approved Authorized Limits may be used for any 
radiological activity instead of developing specific 
Authorized Limits if their use is documented in the 
environmental radiological protection program and the 
specific application of the Authorized Limits is approved 
by the responsible Field Element Manager.  
(g) Documentation of Approved Authorized Limits. Approved 
Authorized Limits and approved revised Authorized Limits and 
supporting documentation must be made available to the public. 
(7) Clearance of Environmental Restoration, Deactivation and 
Decommissioning, and Other Cleanup Materials. 
(a) Clearance of property with residual radioactive material from 
environmental restoration activities, including deactivation and 
decommissioning, must meet the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD. Environmental restoration activities using the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act (CERCLA) process may demonstrate compliance 
with the Specific Requirements in this CRD (including public dose 
assessments, ALARA analysis, and consideration of scenarios)

--- page 57 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-20 2-11-2011 
 
 
using documentation from the CERCLA process and any necessary 
supplemental information. 
(b) For the purpose of clearance of real or personal property, approved 
CERCLA remediation criteria may be considered equivalent to 
Authorized Limits if the appropriate Field Element Manager has 
determined that the criteria meet the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD for Authorized Limits, and provided that the use of the 
criteria as DOE Authorized Limits is documented and approved as 
would be an Authorized Limit. Compliance with all Specific 
Requirements in this CRD not met through the CERCLA process 
must also be demonstrated. 
(c) If the contractor performs environmental restoration activities 
involving clearance of real or personal property with residual 
radioactive material under CERCLA that use the CERCLA 
analysis and documentation in lieu of analysis and documentation 
developed specifically to demonstrate compliance with the 
Specific Requirements in this CRD, the contractor must submit the 
relevant CERCLA documentation and any additional information 
necessary to demonstrate that the requirements for Authorized 
Limits have been met to the responsible Field Element Manager. 
(8) Radiological Monitoring or Surveys. 
(a) All radiological monitoring or surveys performed in support of 
clearance of property must: 
1 Use methodologies sufficient to meet measurement 
objectives such as those in the Multi-Agency Radiation 
Survey and Site Investigation Manual (MARSSIM), the 
Multi-Agency Radiation Survey and Assessment of 
Materials and Equipment Manual (MARSAME) or other 
methodologies approved by DOE; 
2 Meet Measurement Quality Objectives; 
3 Use DOE-approved sampling and analysis techniques, if 
applicable; and  
4 Include an evaluation of non-uniformly distributed residual 
radioactive material, if applicable.  
(b) Instrumentation used for radiological monitoring or surveys must 
be capable of detecting and quantifying residual radioactive 
material consistent with the applicable Authorized Limits, and be:

--- page 58 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-21 
 
 
1 Periodically maintained and calibrated on an established 
frequency; 
2 Appropriate for the type(s), levels, and energies of the 
radiation(s) encountered; and 
3 Appropriate for existing environmental conditions and 
routinely tested for operability. 
(9) Documentation and Verification. Any contractor responsible for 
radiological clearance of property must ensure that final radiological 
monitoring or surveys are conducted and that documentation is prepared 
that shows that the clearance meets applicable DOE Authorized Limits, or 
other applicable requirements including associated restrictions or 
institutional controls (See DOE P 454.1, Use of Institutional Controls, 
current version). 
(10) Public Notification of Clearance of Property. Information on approved 
Authorized Limits, any approved revised Authorized Limits, use of 
pre-approved Authorized Limits, results of radiological monitoring and 
surveys of cleared property with type and quantity of property cleared, and 
independent verification results must be summarized in the Annual Site 
Environmental Report. 
(11) Final Clearance Documentation. Clearance of property must be 
documented. The contents of the documentation or the mechanism for 
documenting information may be tailored to the need, situation, and type 
of property being cleared. For ongoing, routine clearances, e.g., clearance 
of personal property from controlled areas, such documentation may be 
based on the general process(es) rather than each specific clearance. In 
general, the documentation must describe the clearance process(es) and 
the property being cleared. The documentation must serve to demonstrate 
requirements have been met, show criteria used for clearance, identify the 
property’s destination or disposition, as appropriate, and provide 
additional confidence to DOE and assurance to other interested parties that 
the public and the environment are being protected. The documentation 
must indicate any Authorized Limits, including any revised or 
pre-approved Authorized Limits, used for the clearance, and include 
information and data supporting the clearance of property such as 
radiological certification and independent verification results. An annual 
summary of cleared property must be prepared and submitted to the Field 
Element Manager. 
l. Records, Retention and Reporting Requirements. The contractor must establish 
and implement recordkeeping, retention and reporting procedures and practices to 
ensure that the following elements are addressed:

--- page 59 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-22 2-11-2011 
 
 
(1) Records must be maintained to document compliance with the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD. 
(2) Required records include the following: 
(a) Information and data necessary to identify and characterize 
releases of radioactive material to the environment, their fate in the 
environment, and their probable impact on radiation dose to 
members of the public, and any impacts on ecological systems. 
(b) Documentation of individual and collective dose to members of the 
public due to radiological activities. This includes documentation 
of site-specific information on radiation source dispersion patterns, 
location and demography of members of the public in the vicinity 
of the radiological activity and assumed default values or 
site-specific parameters used in calculations. 
(c) Requests for specific authorization for temporary public dose 
limits, and subsequent approvals and other related actions.  
(d) Identification of radiological activities subject to environmental 
radiological protection program requirements, and descriptions of 
the measures to be used in implementing these requirements. 
(e) Documentation of actions taken to implement the ALARA process 
identified in paragraph 2.d. of the Specific Requirements in this 
CRD. 
(f) Documentation of actions taken to demonstrate compliance with 
the public dose limit (See paragraph 2.e.(1) of the Specific 
Requirements in this CRD). 
(g) Documentation of actions taken to implement the BAT selection 
process in regulating liquid discharges, including documentation of 
analyses and factors considered to be important, including 
alternative processes, for the BAT selection process. 
(h) Effluent monitoring and environmental surveillance information 
and data, including: 
1 Results of effluent monitoring for determining sources of 
radiation and radioactive material that provide direct 
exposure to members of the public and releases of 
radioactive material in liquid or airborne effluent; 
2 Results of surveys for radiation and radioactive material in 
the environment;

--- page 60 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 1 
2-11-2011 Page 1-23 
 
 
3 Results of surveys, measurements, and calculations used to 
determine the dose to members of the public and ecological 
receptors from external and internal radiation sources; 
4 Meteorological data used in assessing dose; and 
5 Results of pre-operational monitoring. 
(i) Documentation related to the long-term management of radioactive 
waste and residual radioactive material.  
(j) Final documentation for clearance of property containing residual 
radioactive material. 
(k) Documentation of:  
1 Approved Authorized Limits for routine clearance of 
property for unrestricted or restricted use and the scenarios 
evaluated in selecting the limits; and 
2 Approved revised Authorized Limits for clearance of 
property. 
(l) Annual summaries related to clearance of property. 
(3) Records required by the Specific Requirements in this CRD must be 
maintained by, or transferred to, DOE upon cessation of a DOE 
radiological activity at a site. 
(4) Records must be retained until final disposition is authorized by DOE. 
(5) Reporting. 
(a) Reporting requirements are contained in the CRDs to DOE O 
232.2, Occurrence Reporting and Processing of Operations 
Information, current version, and DOE O 231.1, Environment, 
Safety and Health Reporting, current version. 
(b) The contractor must notify the Field Element Manager within 30 
calendar days when it has been identified that any Specific 
Requirement in this CRD that is not required to be reported under 
paragraph 2.l.(5)(a) has not been met. 
(6) Units. Unless otherwise specified, the quantities used in the reports and 
records required by the Specific Requirements of this CRD must be 
clearly indicated in special units of curie, rad, roentgen, or rem, including 
multiples and subdivisions of these units, or other conventional units, such 
as dpm, dpm/100 cm2, or mass units. The SI units, becquerel (Bq), gray

--- page 61 ---
Attachment 1 DOE O 458.1 
Page 1-24 2-11-2011 
 
 
(Gy), and sievert (Sv) may be provided parenthetically for reference with 
scientific standards. 
3. DEFINITIONS.  See Attachment 2.

--- page 62 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 2 
2-11-2011      Page 2-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
DEFINITIONS 
1. Absorbed Dose (D) — The average energy imparted by ionizing radiation to the matter 
in a volume element per unit mass of irradiated material. The absorbed dose is 
expressed in units of rad (or gray) (1 rad = 0.01 gray). 
2. Actual or Likely Use Scenarios — The current uses and reasonably anticipated uses in 
the foreseeable future of real and personal property considering the history of use; use 
restrictions, designations or controls; affected populations, ecosystems, or natural 
resources; and the property’s historic or cultural significance. For real property 
considerations also include Federal and State use designations; local zoning and future 
land use plans; and proximity to residences, commercial or industrial areas, or areas of 
cultural or historic significance. 
3. Airborne Discharges — Material released to the atmosphere in the form of dusts, 
fumes, particulates, mists, vapors, or gases. 
4. ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) — An approach to radiation protection 
to manage and control releases of radioactive material to the environment, and 
exposure to the work force and to members of the public so that the levels are as low as 
is reasonably achievable, taking into account societal, environmental, technical, 
economic, and public policy considerations. As used in this Order, ALARA is not a 
specific release or dose limit but a process which has the goal of optimizing control 
and management of releases of radioactive material to the environment and doses so 
that they are as far below the applicable limits of the Order as reasonably achievable. 
5. ALARA Process — A graded process for evaluating alternative operations, processes, 
and other measures, for optimizing releases of radioactive material to the environment, 
and exposure to the work force and to members of the public taking into account 
societal, environmental, technical, economic, and public policy considerations to make 
a decision concerning the optimum level of public health and environmental 
protection. A graded approach provides the flexibility to perform qualitative or 
quantitative ALARA analyses. For low doses, qualitative evaluations normally will 
suffice.  
6. Authorized Limit — A limit on the concentration or quantity of residual radioactive 
material on the surfaces or within property that has been derived consistent with DOE 
directives including the ALARA process requirements. An authorized limit may also 
include conditions or measures that limit or control the disposition of property. 
7. Background Radiation — Radiation from: (1) naturally occurring radioactive materials 
which have not been technologically enhanced (i.e., background radiation does not 
include TENORM); (2) cosmic sources; (3) global fallout as it exists in the 
environment (such as from the testing of nuclear explosive devices); (4) radon and its 
decay products in concentrations or levels existing in buildings or the environment 
which have not been elevated as a result of current or prior activities; and (5) consumer

--- page 63 ---
Attachment 2 DOE O 458.1 
Page 2-2      2-11-2011 
 
 
products containing nominal amounts of radioactive material or producing nominal 
amounts of radiation.  
8. Best Available Technology (BAT) — The preferred technology for a particular 
activity, selected from among others after taking into account factors related to 
technology, economics, public policy, and other parameters. As used in this Order, the 
BAT is not a specific level of treatment, but is the conclusion of a selection process in 
which several alternatives are evaluated. 
9. BAT Selection Process — The evaluation of candidate alternative technologies in 
order to select the BAT after considering: technology; economics; the age of 
equipment and facilities involved; the process employed; the engineering aspects of the 
application of various types of control techniques; process changes; other 
environmental impacts (including energy requirements); safety considerations; and 
policy considerations. 
10. Clearance of Property — The removal of property that contains or may contain 
residual radioactive material from DOE radiological control under 10 CFR Part 835 
and DOE O 458.1, current version. 
11. Collective Dose — The sum of the total effective dose to all persons in a specified 
population received in a specified period of time. For clearance of property the 
collective dose refers to the population potentially exposed to the cleared property. 
Collective dose is expressed in units of person-rem (or person-sievert). 
12. Committed Effective Dose (E50) — The sum of the committed equivalent doses to 
various tissues or organs in the body (HT,50), each multiplied by the appropriate tissue 
weighting factor (wT)--that is, E50 = ΣwTHT,50 + wRemainderHRemainder,50, where wRemainder 
is the tissue weighting factor assigned to the remainder organs and tissues and 
HRemainder,50 is the committed equivalent dose to the remainder organs and tissues. 
Committed effective dose is expressed in units of rems (or sieverts). 
13. Committed Equivalent Dose (HT,50) — The equivalent dose calculated to be received 
by a tissue or organ over a 50-year period after the intake of a radionuclide into the 
body. It does not include contributions from radiation sources external to the body. 
Committed equivalent dose is expressed in units of rems (or sieverts). 
14. Controlled Area — Any area to which access is managed by or for DOE to protect 
individuals from exposure to radiation and/or radioactive material as defined by 
10 CFR Part 835. 
15. Derived Concentration Standard (DCS) — A derived concentration value for a 
radionuclide in water that would result in a dose of 100 mrem in a year to a sex- and 
age- weighted reference person using DOE approved dose coefficients and assuming 
continuous exposure.

--- page 64 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 2 
2-11-2011      Page 2-3 
 
 
16. Dose — A general term for absorbed dose, equivalent dose, effective dose, committed 
equivalent dose, committed effective dose, or TED as defined in this Order. 
17. Effective Dose (E) — The summation of the products of the equivalent dose received 
by specified tissues or organs of the body (HT) and the appropriate tissue weighting 
factor (wT)--that is, E = ΣwTHT. It includes the dose from radiation sources internal 
and/or external to the body. For purposes of compliance with this Order, equivalent 
dose to the whole body may be used as effective dose for external exposures. The 
effective dose is expressed in units of rems (or sieverts). 
18. Effluent Monitoring — The collection and analysis of samples of liquid and gaseous 
effluents or measurements of liquid and gaseous effluents performed to characterize 
and quantify radiological contaminants and process stream characteristics, assess 
radiation exposures of members of the public, and demonstrate compliance with 
applicable standards. 
19. Environmental Surveillance — The collection and analysis of samples of air, water, 
soil, foodstuffs, biota, and other media at the DOE site and surrounding environs and 
the measurement of external radiation to demonstrate compliance with applicable 
standards, assess radiation exposure of members of the public, and assess effects, if 
any, on the environment. 
20. Equivalent Dose (HT) — The product of average absorbed dose (DT,R) in rad (or gray) 
in a tissue or organ (T) and a radiation (R) weighting factor (wR). For external dose, the 
equivalent dose to the whole body is assessed at a depth of 1 cm in tissue; the 
equivalent dose to the lens of the eye is assessed at a depth of 0.3 cm in tissue, and the 
equivalent dose to the extremity and skin is assessed at a depth of 0.007 cm in tissue. 
Equivalent dose is expressed in units of rems (or sieverts). 
21. External Dose or Exposure — That portion of the dose received from radiation sources 
outside the body (i.e., external sources). 
22. Facility — Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular DOE 
radiological activity. 
23. General Employee — An individual who is either a DOE or DOE contractor 
employee; an employee of a subcontractor; or an individual who performs work for or 
in conjunction with DOE or utilizes DOE facilities. 
24. Internal Dose or Exposure — That portion of the dose received from radioactive 
material taken into the body (i.e., internal sources). 
25. Liquid Discharge — The release to the environment of radioactive material in a liquid 
medium. The discharge generally occurs at a point, such as the end of a pipe, where it 
is released to any of several receptors in the environment, such as a waterway, land, 
sewer system, etc.

--- page 65 ---
Attachment 2 DOE O 458.1 
Page 2-4      2-11-2011 
 
 
26. Maximally Exposed Individual — A hypothetical individual who – because of 
realistically assumed proximity, activities, and living habits – would receive the 
highest radiation dose, taking into account all pathways, from a given event, process, 
or facility. 
27. Measurement Quality Objectives — A statement of a performance objective or 
requirement for a particular method performance characteristic. 
28. Member of the Public — An individual who is not a general employee. An individual 
is not a member of the public during any period in which the individual receives an 
occupational dose. 
29. Monitoring — The measurement of radiation levels, discharges or environmental 
releases, residual radioactive levels, quantities of radioactive material, or exposure to 
members of the public and the use of the results of these measurements to evaluate 
radiological discharges or releases or potential and actual dose resulting from 
exposures to radioactive material or radiation. 
30. Personal Property — Property of any kind, except for real property. 
31. Potential Dose — A calculated dose based on a postulated set of exposure conditions 
that have a reasonable probability of occurrence. 
32. Public Dose — The dose received by members of the public from exposure to radiation 
and to radioactive material released by a DOE radiological activity whether the 
exposure is within a DOE site boundary or offsite. 
33. Radiation — Ionizing radiation: alpha particles, beta particles, gamma rays, X-rays, 
neutrons, high-speed electrons, high-speed protons, and other particles capable of 
producing ions. Radiation, as used in this Order, does not include non-ionizing 
radiation, such as radio waves or microwaves, or visible, infrared, or ultraviolet light. 
34. Radiation Weighting Factor (wR) — The modifying factor used to calculate the 
equivalent dose from the average tissue or organ absorbed dose; the absorbed dose 
(expressed in rad or gray) is multiplied by the appropriate radiation weighting factor. 
35. Radioactivity — The property or characteristic of radioactive material to undergo 
spontaneous transformations (disintegrations or decay) with the emission of energy in 
the form of radiation. It is measured by the rate of spontaneous transformations of a 
radionuclide. The unit of radioactivity is the curie, Ci (or becquerel, Bq).  
(1 Ci = 3.7 x 1010 Bq). 
36. Radiological Activity — Any activity taken for, or by, DOE that has the potential to 
result in releases of radioactive material to the environment or exposures of members 
of the public to include all doses both present and future, from clearance activities and 
radiation generating devices. The activity may involve a single DOE facility, or

--- page 66 ---
DOE O 458.1 Attachment 2 
2-11-2011      Page 2-5 
 
 
combination of facilities and operations, possibly including an entire site or no fixed 
site at all. 
37. Real Property — Land and anything permanently affixed to the land such as buildings, 
fences and those things attached to the buildings, such as light fixtures, plumbing and 
heating fixtures, or other such items, that would be personal property if not attached. 
38. Reference Person — A hypothetical aggregation of human (male and female) physical 
and physiological characteristics arrived at by international consensus for the purpose of 
standardizing radiation dose calculations. 
39. Remedial Actions — Those actions, consistent with permanent remedy, taken to control 
or remove radiological contaminants to prevent or to minimize doses to members of the 
public. 
40. Representative Person — An individual receiving a dose that is representative of the more 
highly exposed individuals in the population. This term is the equivalent of, and replaces, 
‘average member of the critical group’. (Source: ICRP Publication 103, page 32). 
41. Residual Radioactive Material — Any radioactive material which is in or on soil, air, 
water, equipment, or structures as a consequence of past operations or activities of the 
Department or its predecessors. 
42. Sanitary Sewerage — A system of public sewers for carrying off waste water and refuse, 
but excluding sewage treatment facilities, septic tanks, and leach fields owned or 
operated by, or for, the Department. 
43. Settleable Solids — (i) that matter in waste water which will not stay in suspension 
during a preselected settling period, such as one hour, but settles to the bottom; (ii) in the 
Imhoff cone test, the volume of matter that settles to the bottom of the cone in one hour; 
or (iii) suspended solids that can be removed by conventional sedimentation processes. 
44. Sewer — An artificial conduit, usually underground, for carrying off waste water and 
refuse. 
45. Site — Land or property upon which DOE facilities or activities are located and access to 
which is subject to DOE or DOE contractor control. 
46. Site Boundary — The perimeter of a DOE site, within which DOE or a DOE contractor 
normally can control access or restrict activities. 
47. Soil Column —An in-situ volume of soil through which liquid waste streams percolate 
from ponds, cribs, trenches, drain fields, or other areas or facilities used for the primary 
purpose of removing or retaining the suspended or dissolved radionuclides contained 
within the liquid process waste stream. 
48. Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (TENORM) — 
Any naturally occurring radioactive materials whose radionuclide concentrations or

--- page 67 ---
Attachment 2 DOE O 458.1 
Page 2-6      2-11-2011 
 
 
potential for human exposure have been increased above levels encountered in the natural 
state by human activities. 
49. Tissue Weighting Factor (wT) — The fraction of the overall health risk, resulting from 
uniform, whole body irradiation, attributable to specific tissue (T). The equivalent dose to 
tissue, (HT), is multiplied by the appropriate tissue weighting factor to obtain the effective 
dose (E) contribution from that tissue. 
50. Total Effective Dose (TED) — Sum of the effective dose (for external exposures) and the 
committed effective dose. 
51. Whole Body — For the purposes of external exposure, head, trunk (including male 
gonads), arms above and including the elbow, or legs above and including the knee. 
52. Working Level (WL) — The potential alpha energy concentration of radon decay 
products in 1 liter of air, without regard to the degree of equilibrium, that will result in 
the emission of 1.3 x 105 MeV of alpha particle energy.
