--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, H ealth, Safety and Security 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  FACILITY SAFETY 
1. PURPOSE.  To establish facility and programmatic safety requirements for nuclear 
facilities authorized by the Department of Energy (DOE) for: 
a. Nuclear safety design criteria. 
b. Fire protection. 
c. Criticality safety. 
d. Natural phenomena hazards (NPH) mitigation. 
e. Configuration management program. 
f. Configuration Management Facility safety requirements for explosive, chemical, 
and industrial hazards are contained in other DOE rules and directives. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE Order (O) 420.1C, Facility Safety, dated December 4, 
2012, with respect to the facilities and activities covered by Section 3, below.  
Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual 
or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive.  Contractor Requirements 
Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in effect 
throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Elements.  This Order applies to all Departmental Elements, 
including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) and their 
associated Field Element(s),1 to the extent they are involved with facilities and 
activities described in paragraph 3.b. 
 
1 Operations offices, service centers, site offices, area offices, field offices, government-owned government-operated 
facilities, and regional offices of federally-staffed laboratories that report directly to a DOE Headquarters office. 
DOE O 420.1D

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 420.1D 
 08-05-2026 
 
b. Nuclear Facilities.  Except as stated in paragraph 3.d., this Order applies to all 
Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities authorized by DOE.  Such nuclear 
activities include the design, construction, management, operation, 
decontamination, decommissioning, or demolition of nuclear facilities. 
c. DOE Contractors.  Except as stated in paragraph 3.d., this Order sets forth 
conditions to be applied to contractors performing work that involves facilities 
described in paragraph 3.b.  The CRD must be included in contracts under which 
the contractor is involved with such facilities and activities. 
d. Equivalencies and Exemptions. 
(1) Exemption.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at 50 United States Code §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for 
Naval Reactors, and 2511, and to ensure consistency throughout the joint 
Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator 
for Naval Reactors (Director) implements and oversees requirements and 
practices pertaining to this directive for activities under the Director’s 
cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  This Order does not apply to activities regulated by either the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) or the authorities of a State under 
an agreement with the NRC per the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended (AEA). 
(3) Other Equivalencies/Exemptions.  Any other equivalency or exemption 
to this Order requires the approval of Safety Basis Approval Authority 
(SBAA).  Requests for equivalencies/exemptions will be adjudicated 
by the SBAA within 14 calendar days of receipt of a substantially 
complete request. 
4. REQUIREMENTS.  DOE elements must: 
a. Approve and oversee contractor programs, as specified in Section 5 of this Order. 
b. Implement the requirements in Attachment 1 of this Order for government-owned 
government-operated facilities. 
c. Review and approve safety basis and safety design basis documents in accordance 
with DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety 
Basis and Safety Design Basis Documents.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 420.1D 3 
08-05-2026 
 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Secretarial Officers. 
(1) Ensure that the requirements of this Order and the CRD are implemented 
for facilities or programs under their cognizance.  Review and, where 
justified, approve requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the 
requirements of this Order, processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1D, 
Departmental Directives Program. 
(2) Review and approve safety basis and safety design basis documents in 
accordance with DOE-STD-1104-2016. 
b. Safety Basis Approval Authority. 
(1) Ensure that the facilities, activities, and programs under their purview 
operate in compliance with the requirements of this Order and the CRD. 
(2) Identify contracts to which the CRD applies and notify contracting officers 
when contracts are affected by this Order. 
(3) Review and, where justified, approve equivalencies to DOE technical 
standards.  Approve contractor emergency services organization baseline 
needs assessments (BNAs) that meet the requirements in Attachment 2, 
Chapter II, Section 3.e.(1) of this Order. 
(4) Approve periodic NPH assessment evaluations. 
(5) Consistent with DOE Policy 226.2, Policy for Federal Oversight and 
Contractor Assurance Systems, establish and implement an appropriate 
self-assessment and oversight program for the elements of this Order. 
(6) Review and approve safety basis and safety design basis documents in 
accordance with DOE-STD-1104-2016. 
c. Contracting Officers.  Incorporate the CRD, or its requirements, into affected 
contracts and procurement requests in a timely manner when notified. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS. 
7. REFERENCED STANDARDS.  The following DOE technical standards and industry 
standards are required for this Order in accordance with the applicability and conditions 
described within this Order.  Alternatives to these standards may be utilized with the 
approval of the SBAA. 
a. DOE Standard (STD)-3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility 
Documented Safety Analysis.  This DOE technical standard is required to be used 
for specified new non-reactor Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 420.1D 
 08-05-2026 
b. DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety Basis and 
Safety Design Basis Documents.  This DOE technical standard is required to be 
used by DOE personnel for review and approval of safety basis and safety design 
basis documents.  See Section 4 for specific requirements. 
c. DOE-STD-NE-1020, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design Criteria 
for DOE Facilities.  This DOE technical standard should be used for developing 
the NPH design of new facilities and major modifications.  See Attachment 2, 
Chapter IV of this Order for additional allowances and guidance for using 
DOE-STD-NE-1020. 
d. American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear Society 
(ANS)-8, Nuclear Criticality Safety Standards, and DOE STD-3007-2017, 
Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities 
(or subsequent as approved per contract).  This set of industry standards and this 
Order is required to satisfy or alternatives are required to be approved by 
the SBAA by Criticality Safety Programs for facilities and activities with the 
potential for inadvertent criticalities.  See Attachment 2, Chapter III for 
specific requirements. 
e. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 379-2014, IEEE Standard 
for Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating 
Station Safety Systems.  This industry standard should be applied to the design of 
safety-class structures, systems, and components (SSCs) for new nuclear facilities 
and major modifications, unless another applicable standard is approved by DOE.  
See Attachment 3 for specific requirements. 
f. IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Equipment for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations.  This industry standard should be used to 
ensure environmental qualifications of safety-class SSCs for new nuclear facilities 
and major modifications, unless another applicable standard is approved by DOE.  
See Attachment 3 for specific requirements. 
g. IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria for Independence of Class IE Equipment 
and Circuits.  This industry standard should be used for new nuclear facilities and 
major modifications for physical and electrical separation methods, including the 
use of separation distance, barriers, electrical isolation devices, or any 
combination thereof, unless another applicable standard is approved by DOE.  See 
Attachment 3 for specific requirements.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 420.1D 5 
08-05-2026 
 
8. APPLICABLE STANDARDS.  An applicable DOE technical standard or industry code 
or standard is one for which it has been determined by the contractor that it will be used 
or will be applied for a specific facility/site to meet the design, construction, and 
operational requirements described in this Order.  This Order provides an acceptable 
method for determining which standards will be applicable (as described in the 
Attachments to this Order).  DOE approves the contractor’s list of applicable DOE 
technical standards or industry codes or standards via different means, including approval 
of safety design documents, the fire protection program, and inclusion of the DOE 
technical standards or industry codes or standards in the contract. 
Once a standard is identified as applicable, this Order requires that the applicable 
requirements of the applicable standards be followed unless relief is obtained. 
Together, the applicable standards, and any other applicable DOE requirement 
documents, along with any exemptions and equivalencies, make up the “Code of Record” 
for a given project or design, and reflect DOE’s commitment to standard-based 
safety management. 
9. ACRONYMS.  See Attachment 4. 
10. REFERENCES.  See Attachment 5 
11. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order should be addressed to the Office of the 
Deputy Secretary of Energy. 
12. Safety and Health Policy. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 6 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE ORDER 420.1D, FACILITY SAFETY 
This Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) includes requirements outlined in 
Attachments 2 and 3 of Department of Energy (DOE) Order (O) 420.1, Facility Safety, 
referenced in and made a part of this CRD, and which provide program requirements and/or 
information applicable to contracts in which this CRD is inserted. 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
a. This CRD establishes facility safety requirements for design, construction, 
operation, management, decontamination, decommissioning, and demolition of 
DOE authorized Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities.  Regardless of the 
performer of the work, the contractors are responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD.  The contractors are responsible for flowing down the 
requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier, to the extent necessary, to 
ensure the contractors’ compliance with the requirements. 
b. Contractors must satisfy the requirements set forth in Attachments 2 and 3 
of DOE O 420.1. 
c. For design and construction activities, contractors must identify the applicable 
industry codes and standards, and the applicable DOE requirements and technical 
standards.  Additionally, projects shall establish and maintain a Code of Record 
(COR) early in project design for identifying applicable industry codes and 
standards.  The COR shall also identify proposed exemptions from and 
equivalencies to applicable industry codes and standards. 
d. Contractors should satisfy the requirements in DOE technical standards and 
recommended industry codes and standards that are identified as applicable in 
accordance with Section 1.c. above, unless relief is approved in accordance with 
Section 2, below. 
e. Fulfill the roles and responsibilities for the Building Code Official and the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction for matters involving fire protection, as defined by 
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), including documentation of any 
delegation or assignment of related responsibilities. 
f. Perform responsibilities of “owner,” or other equivalent term in the application of 
DOE technical standards or industry codes and standards, including 
documentation of any delegation or assignment of related responsibilities. 
2. RELIEF FROM REQUIREMENTS, CODES AND STANDARDS. 
a. Requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the requirements of DOE Orders 
and invoked DOE technical standards in this attachment are processed and 
approved by the DOE Safety Basis Approval Authority.

--- page 7 ---
Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 420.1D 
Page 1-2 08-05-2026 
b. Requests for equivalencies and exemptions to the requirements of applicable 
industry codes and standards in this attachment are processed and approved by the 
contractor.  Equivalencies to industry codes and standards determined to be 
applicable to the facility design or operations must demonstrate an equivalent 
level of safety (i.e., meets or exceeds the level of protection). 
3. ACRONYMS.  See Attachment 9. 
4. REFERENCES.  See Attachment 5

--- page 8 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2 
08-05-2026 Page 2-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
FACILITY SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
This attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with Order (O) 420.1, 
Facility Safety, as well as information and/or requirements applicable to contracts into which the 
associated Contractor Requirements Document (CRD), (see Attachment 1 of O 420.1) 
is inserted.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter I  
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-1 
 
CHAPTER I 
NUCLEAR SAFETY DESIGN CRITERIA 
1. OBJECTIVE.  To establish requirements for safety design of DOE Hazard Category 1, 2, 
and 3 nuclear facilities to support implementation of DOE Policy (P) 420.1. 
The requirements of this chapter (and the criteria in Attachment 3 of O 420.1) support 
implementation of the requirements for Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities in 
10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management, Subpart B, Safety Basis Requirements. 
2. APPLICABILITY. 
a. This chapter applies to the design and construction of: 
(1) New Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as defined by 
10 CFR § 830; and 
(2) Major modifications to Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as 
defined in 10 CFR  § 830, that could substantially change the facility 
safety basis. 
b. This chapter does not impose requirements on existing facilities, except for 
major modifications to those facilities.  Major modification design requirements 
are addressed through strategy documents and preliminary documented 
safety analysis. 
c. Except for the requirements of Section 3.b.(3), this chapter does not apply to 
nuclear deactivation or decontamination and decommissioning activities at end of 
facility life if the safety analysis demonstrates that adequate protection is provided 
consistent with the requirements of 10 CFR § 830 through alternate means and it 
is not cost beneficial to apply the provisions of this chapter for the limited 
remaining life of the activity. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Integration of Safety with Design. 
(1) Safety analyses must be used to: 
(a) Identify safety class and safety significant functions needed to 
prevent and/or mitigate design-basis accidents (DBAs), including 
natural and man-induced hazards and events; 
(b) Identify specific and appropriate controls to fulfill those functions. 
(c) Identify specific administrative controls needed to fulfill safety 
functions.  (Note: See DOE-STD-1186, Specific Administrative 
Controls, as per site contract).

--- page 10 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter I DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-I-2 08-05-2026 
b. Nuclear Facility Design. 
(1) The nuclear facility design must include multiple layers of protection (as 
part of the design defense in depth) to prevent or mitigate the unintended 
release of radioactive materials into the environment. 
(2) Defense in depth must include all of the following: 
(a) Choosing an appropriate site; 
(b) Minimizing the quantity of material-at-risk; 
(c) Applying conservative design margins; 
(d) Applying quality assurance; 
(e) Using successive/multiple controls for protection against 
radioactive releases (Note: If an exemption to having multiple 
controls is required, it is the responsibility of the Safety Basis 
Approval Authority to approve, or disapprove, the exemption for 
not including multiple controls); 
(f) Using multiple means to ensure safety functions are met by: 
1 Controlling processes; 
2 Maintaining processes in safe status; 
3 Providing preventive and/or mitigative controls for 
accidents with the potential for radiological releases; 
4 Providing the ability to monitor facility conditions to 
support recovery from upset or accident conditions; 
(g) Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities with uncontained 
radioactive materials (as opposed to materials determined by safety 
analyses to be adequately contained within qualified drums, grout, 
or vitrified materials) must have the means to confine the 
uncontained radioactive materials to minimize their potential 
release in facility effluents during normal operations and during 
and following accidents, up to and including DBAs.  For a specific 
nuclear facility, the number, arrangement, and characteristics of 
confinement barriers as determined on a case-by case basis. 
(3) Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities must be designed to: 
(a) Facilitate safe deactivation, decommissioning, decontamination, 
and demolition at the end of facility life,

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter I  
08-05-2026 Page 2-I-3 
 
(b) Facilitate inspections, testing, maintenance, repair, and 
replacement of safety SSCs as part of a reliability, maintainability, 
and availability program with the objective of maintaining the 
facility in a safe state; 
(c) Keep occupational radiation exposures within regulatory 
limits; and 
(d) Provide hazard controls for prevention and mitigation of hazardous 
material releases and for defense in depth. 
(4) Facility process systems must be designed to minimize waste production 
and mixing of radioactive and non-radioactive wastes. 
(5) Safety SSCs and safety software must be designed to perform their safety 
functions when called upon. 
(6) Active safety class systems must be designed to meet single 
failure criterion.2 
(7) Facility design must also be integrated with other design requirements, as 
applicable, including applicable building codes and proposed standards. 
 
 
2 IEEE 379-2014, IEEE Standard Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating Station 
Safety Systems, provides a definition of the single failure criterion, and ANS 58.9-2002 (R2009), Single Failure 
Criteria for Light Water Reactor Safety-Related Fluid Systems, provides additional guidance for single failure 
criteria for mechanical systems.

--- page 12 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter II 
08-05-2026 Page 2-II-1 
 
CHAPTER II 
FIRE PROTECTION 
1. OBJECTIVE.  To establish requirements for comprehensive fire protection programs for 
DOE facilities and emergency response organizations to: 
a. Minimize the likelihood of occurrence of a fire-related event; 
b. Minimize the consequences of a fire-related event affecting the public, workers, 
environment, property, and missions. 
2. APPLICABILITY.  This chapter applies to organizations that have responsibility for the 
design, construction, maintenance, or operation of Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 nuclear 
facilities used for DOE mission purposes and associated facilities authorized by the 
Department of Energy (DOE). 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General Fire Protection Program Requirements. 
(1) Codes and Standards.  The codes and standards adopted by the contractor, 
including DOE technical standards, the building code, the fire code (e.g., 
International Fire Code), National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
codes and standards, and other industry codes and standards must be 
identified in the fire protection and emergency response programs. 
(a) New Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, and major 
modifications thereto must be constructed to meet applicable codes 
and standards that have been designated within design 
documentation and are in effect when design criteria are approved 
(otherwise known as the Code of Record, or COR). 
(b) Provisions of subsequent editions of codes or standards 
(promulgated after the COR is established) are mandatory only to 
the extent that they are explicitly stated to be applicable to existing 
facilities. 
(c) Conflicts between DOE Order (O) 420.1, NFPA codes and 
standards, and the applicable building code must be resolved 
as follows: 
1 Requirements of DOE O 420.1 take precedence over all 
NFPA codes and standards and building code requirements 
and are subject to the relief requirements of DOE O 420.1.

--- page 13 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter 2 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-II-2 08-05-2026 
b. Conflicts between NFPA requirements and the applicable building code 
requirements are resolved by the contractor Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) 
Fire Protection Program Administration. 
(1) Documentation.  A documented fire protection program that includes the 
elements and requirements identified in this chapter for design; operations; 
emergency response; fire analysis and assessments; wildland fire; and 
specific fire protection program criteria must be developed, implemented, 
and maintained by the contractor. 
(2) Fire Protection Methods.  Fire Protection Programs must describe the 
methods used to implement the requirements of this chapter. 
(3) DOE-STD-1066-2023 is an acceptable method. 
c. Design. 
(1) Design Process.  The facility design process shall ensure that fire 
protection program requirements are documented and incorporated into 
plans and specifications for design activities. 
(2) Protection Thresholds.3 
(a) New facilities housing safety SSCs must be of Type I or Type II 
construction, as defined in the applicable building codes. 
(b) Automatic fire suppression systems must be provided as required 
by the adopted building code, and throughout facilities in which 
any of the following conditions exist: 
1 Where required by safety basis document or; 
2 Where determined by the fire hazards analysis (FHA); 
(c) For property protection, multiple fire protection approaches, such 
as a fire suppression system and a fire detection and alarm system, 
must be provided in areas where the maximum possible fire loss 
(MPFL) to a DOE-owned or leased facility exceeds $300 million 
(in 2025 dollars) at the time of design finalization. 
(d) For property protection, fire areas must be established such that the 
MPFL to a DOE owned or leased facility for each fire area does 
not exceed $412 million (in 2025 dollars) at the time of design 
finalization.  Fire walls or other separation approaches may be 
used to meet this requirement. 
 
3 Some of the requirements in this section on protection thresholds may not apply to portions of subterranean 
facilities that otherwise meet the requirements in Appendix D of DOE-STD-1066-2023.

--- page 14 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter II 
08-05-2026 Page 2-II-3 
 
(3) Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems. 
(a) Fire Suppression.  The inadvertent operation or failure of fire 
suppression systems must not result in the loss of function of 
safety class or safety significant systems.  (Note: This requirement 
addresses proper design of the fire suppression system to ensure it 
does not impact safety systems and is not intended to drive need 
for redundancy in safety significant system design.) 
(b) Fire Barriers.  Fire barrier locations and construction must 
be documented. 
(c) Life Safety.  Requirements for life safety and means of egress are 
provided in the adopted codes and standards, such as the 
International Building Code, or NFPA 101, Life Safety Code. 
(d) Water Supply and Distribution.  A reliable and adequate water 
supply and distribution system must be provided as documented 
through appropriate analysis. 
(4) Special Hazards.  Fire protection systems or features, and appropriate 
procedures to address fire and related hazards that are special or unique 
to DOE and not addressed by industry codes and standards, must 
be established. 
d. Operations. 
(1) Criteria and Procedures.  Comprehensive, written fire protection criteria 
and procedures must be established to implement the fire protection 
program requirements that include: 
(a) Site-specific requirements; 
(b) Staff organization, resources, training, and roles 
and responsibilities; 
(c) Inspection, testing, and maintenance of fire protection systems; 
(d) Use and storage of combustible, flammable, radioactive, and 
hazardous materials; 
(e) A “hot-work” control program; 
(f) Identification and tracking of fire protection system impairments; 
(g) Fire prevention measures (e.g., reduced combustible loading, hot-
work procedures, ignition source controls); 
(h) Facility and FHA assessment programs;

--- page 15 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter 2 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-II-4 08-05-2026 
(i) Design and construction oversight; and 
(j) Equivalencies, exemptions, modifications, and 
variances processes. 
(2) Implementation.  To ensure effective implementation of these 
requirements, the following elements must be addressed. 
(a) Staffing.  The contractor must ensure it has access to qualified, 
trained fire protection staff (that includes fire protection engineers 
[FPEs], technicians, and firefighting personnel) needed to 
implement the requirements of this chapter. 
(b) Design Review.  Documented review of plans, specifications, 
procedures, and acceptance tests must be conducted by an FPE.  
A process must be established to oversee fire protection-related 
activities from the initiation of design to final acceptance. 
(c) Equivalencies and Exemptions.  A process must be established for 
developing and requesting AHJ approval of fire protection 
equivalencies and exemptions to fire protection requirements.  
Records of technical justification must be maintained and 
reevaluated for appropriateness as activities or operations change. 
e. Emergency Response.  Provide emergency response capabilities, as necessary, to 
meet site needs as established by the BNA, safety basis requirements, and 
applicable regulations, codes and standards. 
(1) Baseline Needs Assessment.  A BNA of the fire protection and emergency 
response organization must be conducted, and the BNA must: 
(a) Establish capabilities to provide: 
1 Effective response to extinguish fires; 
2 Emergency medical, rescue and hazardous materials 
response; and 
3 Staffing, apparatus, facilities, equipment, training, pre-
incident plans, mutual aid, and procedures. 
(b) Reflect applicable requirements of NFPA codes and standards, and 
DOE direction; 
(c) Be reviewed at least every 3 years, or whenever a significant new 
hazard that is not covered by the current BNA is introduced, and 
be updated as appropriate; and, 
(d) Be incorporated into site emergency plans, FHAs, and safety 
basis documentation.

--- page 16 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter II 
08-05-2026 Page 2-II-5 
 
(2) Pre-Incident Plans.  Pre-incident strategies, plans, and standard operating 
procedures must be established to enhance the effectiveness of manual fire 
suppression activities, including areas within or adjacent to, moderator-
controlled areas.  The criticality safety staff must review pre-incident 
plans and procedures related to moderator-controlled areas. 
(3) Manual Fire Suppression Activities. 
(a) Physical access and appropriate equipment that is accessible for 
effective manual firefighting intervention must be provided. 
(b) Procedures governing the use of fire-fighting water or other 
neutron moderating materials to suppress fire within, or adjacent 
to, moderation-controlled areas must be established and reviewed 
by a criticality subject matter expert prior to release. 
(c) Procedures governing firefighting techniques to be used during 
deactivation, decontamination, and demolition phases must be 
established, when applicable. 
(d) Where no alternative exists to criticality safety restrictions on the 
use of water for fire suppression, the need for such restrictions 
must be fully documented with written technical justification. 
f. Fire Hazard Analyses and Facility Assessments. 
(1) Fire Hazards Analyses.  FHAs, using a graded approach, must be 
conducted for all Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities and major 
modifications thereto; 
(a) The FHAs must be: 
1 Performed under the direction of an FPE; 
2 Reviewed every 3 years by an FPE and revised as 
appropriate (Note: If no revision is necessary, this result 
must be documented following the review); 
3 Revised when 
a A modification to a facility or process adds a 
significant new fire safety risk as determined by the 
contractor AHJ; 
b Integrated into safety basis documentation. 
(2) Facility Assessments.  Fire protection assessments must be conducted for 
Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 facilities at least every 3 years, or at a 
frequency with appropriate justification approved by the DOE Head of 
Field Element.

--- page 17 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter III 
08-05-2026 Page 2-III-1 
 
CHAPTER III 
NUCLEAR CRITICALITY SAFETY 
1. OBJECTIVE.  To establish requirements for developing and implementing nuclear 
criticality safety programs (CSPs) for nuclear facilities and activities, including materials 
transportation activities, which provides reasonable expectation of adequate protection to 
the public, workers, and the environment. 
2. APPLICABILITY.  This chapter is applicable to Department of Energy (DOE) elements 
and DOE contractors with responsibility for Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities 
that involve or will potentially involve radionuclides in such quantities that are equal to 
or greater than the single parameter limits for fissionable materials listed in American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear Society (ANS) S-8.1-2014, 
Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors, and 
ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety Control of Selected Actinide Nuclides.  
These limits must be adjusted where process conditions could credibly involve 
moderators or reflectors that are more effective than light water. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. A CSP document must be developed and maintained that describes how the 
contractor will implement the requirements and standards in this chapter. 
b. A reactor facility CSP, documented safety analysis, or safety design study must 
describe nonreactor nuclear facility activities (e.g., fissile material storage and 
handling) within the scope of the CSP, and reactor activities excluded from the 
CSP, as applicable. 
c. The CSP document must describe how the contractor will satisfy the requirements 
of the American National Standards Institute/American Nuclear Society-8 series 
of nuclear criticality safety standards that are in effect as of the date this Order, 
unless otherwise modified and approved by the Safety Basis Approval Authority. 
d. Criticality safety evaluations must be conducted in accordance with 
DOE-STD-3007-2017, Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities, or by other documented methods approved by 
the DOE Safety Basis Approval Authority. 
e. Fissile Material Accumulation Control.  Facilities that conduct operations 
using  fissionable material in a form that could inadvertently accumulate 
in significant quantities must include procedures for detecting and 
characterizing accumulations.

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter III DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-III-2 08-05-2026 
f. Criticality safety evaluations must show that entire processes involving 
fissionable materials will remain subcritical under normal and credible 
abnormal conditions. 
g. The criteria and process for developing the guidelines for firefighting in areas 
within or adjacent to moderator-controlled areas must be coordinated with 
firefighting pre-incident plans and procedures.

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter IV  
08-05-2026 Page 2-IV-1 
 
CHAPTER IV 
NATURAL PHENOMENA HAZARDS MITIGATION 
1. OBJECTIVE.  To establish requirements for facility design, construction, and operations 
to protect the public, workers, and the environment from the impact of natural 
phenomena hazards (NPH) events (e.g., earthquake, wind, flood, lightning, snow, and 
volcanic eruption). 
2. APPLICABILITY.  Requirements in this chapter apply to nuclear facilities.  Design 
requirements (Sections 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c, below) apply to new Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities, major modifications, and modifications that may be warranted to 
comply with a change in hazard from a periodic NPH assessment. 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General.  Facilities must be designed, constructed, maintained, and operated to 
ensure that structures, systems, and components (SSCs) will be able to perform 
their intended safety functions effectively under the combined effects of NPH and 
normal loads defined in the applicable codes contained in facilities’ Codes of 
Records.  Nuclear facility safety functions that the SSCs must perform during and 
after an NPH event must be defined in the facility’s safety basis documentation. 
b. NPH Design Criteria.  The design and hazard assessment of new nuclear facilities 
and their major modifications must be developed in accordance with the 
applicable requirements and criteria contained in DOE-Standard (STD)-1020, 
Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design Criteria for DOE Facilities. 
Seismic Design Category (SDC)-3 SSCs may be designed, including site 
characterization and probabilistic seismic hazard analysis, per the DOE-STD-
1020 rules for SDC-2 SSCs, but with use of an importance factor I = 2.0.  
Alternatively, SDC-3 SSCs will be designed per DOE-STD-1020. 
c. NPH Accident Analysis.  The NPH analysis supporting design and construction of 
facilities and safety SSCs must be documented and include evaluation of: 
(1) Potential damage to and failure of safety SSCs resulting from both direct 
and indirect NPH events and 
(2) Common cause/effect and interactions resulting from failures of other 
nearby facilities or other SSCs in the same facility caused by or induced 
by an NPH event.

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter IV DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-IV-2 08-05-2026 
d. Review and Upgrade Requirements for Existing DOE Nuclear Facilities (Hazard 
Category 1, 2, and 3). 
(1) Existing facility or site NPH assessments must be reviewed at least once 
every 20 years and whenever significant changes in NPH data, criteria, 
and assessment methods warrant updating the assessments.  Section 9.2 of 
DOE-STD-1020 contains criteria and guidance for performing these 
reviews.  The review results, along with any recommended updated 
actions, must be submitted to the DOE Head of Field Element for 
approval.  If no update is necessary, this result must be documented 
following the review. 
(2) As a modification to the procedure in DOE-STD-1020, if the mean hazard 
of an updated NPH assessment is within one standard deviation of the 
mean hazard of the NPH assessment of record, then no further evaluation 
is required. 
(3) If a new assessment of NPH indicates deficiencies in existing SSC design, 
a plan for upgrades must be developed and implemented on a prioritized 
schedule, based on the safety significance of the upgrades, time or funding 
constraints, and mission requirements.  The upgrade plans must also be 
submitted to the Safety Basis Approval Authority for approval. 
Sections 9.3 and 9.4 of DOE-STD-1020 contain guidance on performing 
upgrade evaluations. 
e. Seismic Detection.  Sites with Hazard Category 1 or 2 nuclear facilities must have 
instrumentation or other means to detect and record the occurrence and severity of 
seismic events. 
f. Post-Natural Phenomena Procedures.  Hazard Category 1 or 2 nuclear facilities 
must have procedures for responding to damage from severe NPH events and 
placing a facility into a safe configuration when damage has occurred.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 2, Chapter V 
08-05-2026 Page 2-V-1 
 
CHAPTER V 
CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
1. OBJECTIVE.  To establish requirements for a configuration management program for 
Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities. 
2. APPLICABILITY.  Requirements of this chapter apply to all Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 
nuclear facilities: 
3. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. A documented configuration management program must be established and 
implemented that ensures consistency among credited system requirements and 
performance criteria, system documentation, and physical configuration of the 
systems within the scope of the program.  Department of Energy (DOE)-Standard 
(STD)-1073-2016, Configuration Management, describes one acceptable 
methodology for establishing configuration management programs.  The 
configuration management program must address the following objectives: 
(1) Design control; 
(2) Work control (including maintenance control); 
(3) Change control; 
(4) Document control; and 
(5) Assessments. 
b. Credited system design documents and supporting documents must be identified 
and kept current using formal change control and work control processes.  
DOE-STD-3024-2011, Content of System Design Descriptions, describes one 
acceptable methodology to achieve this function.  Design documentation 
must include: 
(1) System requirements and performance criteria essential to performance of 
the system’s safety functions; 
(2) The basis for system requirements; and 
(3) A description of how the current system configuration satisfies the 
requirements and performance criteria. 
c. System assessments must include risk- and performance-based reviews of system 
operability, reliability, and material condition.  Exemptions from periodic reviews 
may be approved where performance indicators demonstrate stable, low-risk 
conditions.  Reviews must assess the system for: 
(1) The ability to perform design and safety functions;

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 2, Chapter V DOE O 420.1D 
Page 2-V-2 08-05-2026 
(2) Physical configuration as compared to system documentation; and 
(3) System and component performance in comparison to established 
performance criteria. 
d. System maintenance and repair and modification that could affect credited safety 
functions must be controlled through a formal change control process to ensure 
that changes are not inadvertently introduced and that required system 
performance is not compromised.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 3 
08-05-2026 Page 3-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR SAFETY STRUCTURES, SYSTEMS, AND COMPONENTS 
This attachment provides requirements for the design and construction of safety structures, 
systems, and components (SSCs). 
1. OBJECTIVE.  Safety class and safety significant SSCs shall be designed and constructed 
using an identified and documented set of applicable industry codes and standards, 
together with relevant Department of Energy (DOE) design criteria, standards, and 
directives.  This approach provides a structured basis for achieving reliable performance 
of credited safety functions under the conditions and events for which the SSCs 
are intended. 
2. APPLICABILITY. 
a. This attachment applies to the design and construction of: 
(1) New Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities as defined by 10 Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 830, Nuclear Safety Management; and 
(2) Major modifications to Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities, as 
defined in 10 CFR 830. 
b. This attachment does not impose requirements on existing facilities, except for 
major modifications to those facilities. 
c. This attachment does not apply to nuclear deactivation or decontamination and 
decommissioning activities at end of facility life if the safety analysis 
demonstrates that adequate protection is provided consistent with the 
requirements of 10 CFR  § 830 through alternate means and that it is not 
cost-beneficial to apply the provisions of this attachment for the limited 
remaining life of the activity. 
3. REQUIREMENTS.  Safety SSCs must be designed, commensurate with the importance 
of the safety functions performed, to perform their safety functions when called upon, as 
determined by the safety analysis. 
a. General Design Criteria. 
(1) Conservative Design Margin.  Safety SSCs must be designed with 
appropriate margins of safety, as defined in applicable DOE or industry 
codes and standards.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 3 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 3-2 08-05-2026 
(2) System Reliability. 
(a) The single failure criterion, requirements, and design analysis 
identified in Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) 379-2014, IEEE Standard for Application of the Single-
Failure Criterion to Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety 
Systems, must be applied to active safety class SSCs during the 
design process as the primary method of achieving reliability, 
unless another risk informed methodology is approved in 
accordance with Section 2 of this Order, by the contractor.  
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Nuclear 
Society (ANS) 58.9-2002 (R2015), “Single Failure Criteria for 
LWR Safety-Related Fluid Systems,” may be used in defining the 
scope of active safety class mechanical SSCs. 
(b) Safety significant SSCs must be designed to reliably perform all 
their safety functions.  This can be achieved through a number of 
means, including use of redundant systems/components, increased 
testing frequency, high reliability components, and diagnostic 
coverage (e.g., online testing; monitoring of component and 
system performance; and monitoring of various failure modes).  
DOE-STD-1195-2011, Design of Safety Significant Safety 
Instrumented Systems Used at DOE Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities, 
provides an acceptable method for achieving high reliability of 
safety significant safety instrumented systems. 
(3) Environmental Qualification. 
(a) Safety class SSCs must be designed to perform all safety functions 
with no failure mechanism that could lead to common cause 
failures under postulated service conditions.  The requirements of 
IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E 
Equipment for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, must be used 
to ensure environmental qualifications of safety class SSCs, unless 
another applicable standard is approved by the Safety Basis 
Approval Authority. 
(b) Safety significant SSCs located in a harsh environment must 
be evaluated to establish qualified life.  This may be 
accomplished using manufacturers’ recommendations or other 
appropriate methods. 
(4) Safe Failure Modes.  The facility design must provide reliable safe 
conditions and sufficient confinement of hazardous material during and 
after all DBAs.  At both the facility- and SSC-level, the design must 
ensure that most probable modes of failure (e.g., failure to open versus 
failure to close) will increase the likelihood of a safe condition.

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 3 
08-05-2026 Page 3-3 
 
(5) Support System and Interface Design. 
(a) Support SSCs must be designed as safety class or safety significant 
SSCs if their failures prevent safety SSCs or specific 
administrative controls from performing their safety functions. 
(b) Interfaces—such as pressure retention boundaries, electrical 
supply, instrumentation, cooling water, and other support 
systems—may exist between safe ty SSCs and non-safety SSCs.  
These interfaces must be evaluated to identify non-safety SSC 
failures that would prevent safety SSCs from performing their 
intended safety function.  IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria 
for Independence of Class IE Equipment and Circuits, must be 
used for physical and electrical separation methods, including the 
use of separation distance, barriers, electrical isolation devices, or 
any combination thereof, unless another applicable standard is 
approved by DOE.  This application includes a design to ensure 
that both direct and indirect impacts of DBAs (e.g., fire, seismic) 
will not cause failure of safety functions. 
(6) Protection Against Fire.  Safety class systems must be designed such that 
safety function is maintained for any postulated fire events that credit the 
safety class systems. 
(7) Quality Assurance.  A quality assurance program must be established that 
satisfies 10 CFR § 830, Subpart A, “Quality Assurance Requirements,” 
early in the project, such that safety SSCs and their associated support 
systems are designed, procured, fabricated, erected, and tested to standards 
and quality requirements commensurate with their importance to safety. 
b. Specific Design Criteria and Use of National Codes and Standards.  The selection 
and use of an appropriate set of applicable codes and standards establishes design 
criteria to provide assurance that the SSCs are designed to reliably perform their 
intended functions.  The DOE technical standards and the identified industry 
codes and standards, which are widely used for nuclear facility design and 
construction, must be evaluated for applicability.  Alternative standards may be 
selected, provided they are evaluated to achieve an equivalent level of safety. 
DOE technical standards and applicable codes and standards are considered 
necessary when they provide relevant design requirements for the safety SSCs 
that are being designed and are agreed upon in the Code of Record (COR) (i.e., 
they provide design requirements that are needed to ensure that desired SSC 
functions are achieved, and these requirements are appropriate for the design 
materials, configuration, and service conditions). 
Further, the use of specific codes and standards may be directed by the DOE 
Safety Basis Approval Authority.  (Note: The stated applicability of industry 
codes and standards (e.g., for nuclear reactors) should not be used to narrowly 
interpret relevancy for SSC design.)

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 3 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 3-4 08-05-2026 
Before using these codes and standards, their application to specific DOE 
design(s) must be reviewed.  Once a code or standard is identified as applicable, 
the applicable requirements (i.e., mandatory statements) must be applied in the 
design unless an equivalent approach is documented in the COR. 
The Nuclear Safety Design Agreement or the Preliminary Documented Safety 
Analysis may be used to specify provisions for relief (exemptions and 
equivalencies) from identified, applicable design and construction codes and 
standards.  The set of codes and standards identified below is not meant to be 
all-inclusive.  It is expected that design of SSCs will require selection of 
additional codes and standards beyond those identified below.  For example, 
unique design features, detailed design considerations, and release of 
advancements may drive selection of additional codes and standards.  Facility 
designers must identify the complete set of codes and standards necessary to meet 
the general design criteria identified above (see also Attachment 4 of O 420.1 for 
additional codes and standards). 
(1) Structural.  Table 1 provides relevant codes and standards.  Attachment 2, 
Chapter IV of O 420.1 provides additional natural phenomena hazard 
design requirements. 
Table 1:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Structures 
Structures Safety Significant Safety Class 
Concrete American Concrete Institute (ACI)-
318; ACI-349 
ACI-349 
Steel ANSI/ American Institute of Steel 
Construction (AISC) 360; 
AISC 325; ANSI/AISC N690 
ANSI/AISC N690 
 
Note: See DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis 
and Design Criteria for DOE Facilities, for further discussion on selection 
and use of codes for structural design of SSCs. 
(2) Mechanical and Process Equipment.  Table 2 provides relevant codes 
and standards. 
Table 2:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Process Equipment 
Process Equipment Safety Significant Safety Class 
Reactor Vessel and 
Internal Support 
Structures 
American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers (ASME) Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Code (BPVC), 
Section III 
ASME BPVC, Section III 
Pressure vessels ASME BPVC, Secti on VIII, ASME BPVC, Section VIII,

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 3 
08-05-2026 Page 3-5 
 
Process Equipment Safety Significant Safety Class 
Tanks (0-15 psig) American Petroleum Institute 
(API)-620; 
ASME BPVC Section VIII, 
Division 1 or 2 
API-620; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, 
Division 1 or 2 
Tanks (containing 
flammable liquids) 
API-620; API-650; 
Applicable National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) codes and 
standards 
API-620; API-650; 
Applicable NFPA codes and 
standards 
Tanks 
(atmospheric 
pressure) 
API-650; American Water Works 
Association (AWWA) D100 
API-650; AWWA D100 
Pumps ASME B73.1, B73.2; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII; 
AWWA D100; 
Hydraulic Institute Standards, as 
applicable 
ASME B73.1, B73.2; ASME 
BPVC, Section VIII; AWWA 
D100; 
Hydraulic Institute Standards, as 
applicable 
Piping ASME B31.3 ASME B31.3 
Valves ASME B31.3; ANSI N278.1 ASME B31.3; ANSI N278.1 
Heat Exchangers American Society of Heating, 
Refrigeration, and Air 
Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE) Handbook; ASME 
BPVC, Section VIII, 
Division 1; TEMA B, C, or R 
ASHRAE Handbook; 
ASME BPVC, Section VIII, 
Division 1; Tank Equipment 
Manufacturers Association 
(TEMA) B, C, or R 
Gloveboxes ASTM C852; American Glovebox 
Society (AGS)-G006 
ASTM C852; AGS-G006 
 
(3) Ventilation.  Table 3 provides relevant codes and standards. 
Appendix A of DOE Guide (G) 420.1-1A, Nonreactor Nuclear Safety 
Design Criteria for use with DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, and DOE-
HDBK-1169-2003, Nuclear Air Cleaning Handbook, provide guidance for 
confinement ventilation systems design and performance criteria.  
Alternate methods must be approved by DOE Heads of Field Element.

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 3 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 3-6 08-05-2026 
Table 3:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Ventilation System Components 
Ventilation Safety Significant Safety Class 
Ducts ASME AG-1 ASME AG-1 
Fans ASHRAE Handbook; ASME AG-1 ASHRAE Handbook; ASME 
AG-1 
Filtration ASME AG-1; 
DOE-STD-3020-2015 
ASME AG-1; 
DOE-STD-3020-2015 
Balance of system for 
confinement 
ventilation 
ASME AG-1 ASME AG-1 
Off-gas treatment AS ME AG-1 ASME AG-1 
 
(4) Mechanical Handling Equipment.  Table 4 provides relevant codes and 
standards. 
Table 4:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Handling Equipment 
Handling 
Equipment Safety Significant Safety Class 
Cranes Applicable Crane Manufacturing 
Association of America (CMAA) 
standards; ASME NOG-1; 
ASME NUM-1; ASME B30.2; 
DOE-STD-1090-2011 
Applicable CMAA standards; ASME 
NOG-1; 
ASME NUM-1; ASME B30.2; DOE-
STD-1090-2011 
Other 
equipment 
ASME B30 Series: DOE-STD-
1090-2011 
ASME B30 Series; DOE-STD-1090-
2011 
 
(5) Electrical.  Tables 5 and 6 provide relevant codes and standards. 
Note: ANSI/IEEE standards, below, define requirements for the 
manufacturing, installation, and testing of commercial reactor Safety-
Class 1E electrical systems and components.  While these requirements 
may not be directly applicable to nonreactor nuclear facilities, these 
standards contain useful and significant information that should be 
considered. 
Table 5:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Electrical Systems 
Electrical Safety Significant Safety Class 
Hardware Applicable NFPA codes and 
standards; Illuminating 
Engineering Society (IES) 
Handbook (HB)-10; 
IEEE C2, C37 
Applicable NFPA codes and standards; 
IES HB-10; 
IEEE C2, C37 
 IEEE-80, 141, 142, 242, 399, 
446, 493, 577 
IEEE-80, 141, 142, 242, 308, 338, 379, 
384, 399, 493, 577

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 3 
08-05-2026 Page 3-7 
 
Table 6:  IEEE Standards used for Both Safety Significant and Safety Class Electrical Systems, 
as appropriate 
Electrical Safety Significant and Safety Class 
Guidance standards for use as applicable for 
specific hardware 
IEEE-323, 334, 336, 344, 352, 379, 382, 
383, 387, 420, 450, 484, 493, 535, 603, 627, 
628, 649, 650, 833, 946 
 
(6) Instrumentation, Control, and Alarm Systems.  The design of safety class 
instrumentation and control systems must incorporate sufficient 
independence, redundancy, diversity, and separation to ensure that all 
safety-related functions associated with such equipment can be performed.  
Safety significant components must be evaluated as to the need for 
redundancy on a case-by-case basis.  DOE-STD-1195-2011 provides an 
acceptable method for achieving high reliability of safety significant 
safety instrumented systems. 
Table 7 provides relevant codes and standards.  The codes and standards 
for electrical systems (in Tables 5 and 6) may also be applicable to design 
of instrumentation and control systems and need to be evaluated in 
this context. 
Table 7:  Codes for Safety Significant and Safety Class Instrumentation, Control, and 
Alarm Components 
Instruments, 
Controls, and 
Alarms Safety Significant Safety Class 
Hardware Applicable NFPA codes and 
standards; 
ANSI/ANS-8.3, 58.8, N13.1, N323D; 
ANSI/ International Society of 
Automation (ISA)-series including 
ISA 67.04.01 and ISA TR 84.00.06; 
IEEE-C2, N42.18, 1023, 1050; 
7-4.3.2; and DOE-STD-1195-2011 
Applicable NFPA codes and 
standards; ANSI/ANS-8.3, 58.8, 
N13.1, ANSI-N323D; ANSI/ISA-
series including ISA 67.04.01 and 
ISA TR 84.00.06; 
IEEE-C2, N42.18, 603, 1023, 1050, 
7-4.3.2 
 
c. Nuclear Reactor Safety Design Criteria.  Nuclear reactors are an important class 
of DOE facilities that require special attention to design criteria and standards to 
ensure safe design and operations. 
(1) The COR for existing DOE nuclear reactors has been established by their 
designs.  When a major modification is made to an existing reactor, the 
existing COR is the starting point for the design of the major modification. 
(2) For any new DOE nuclear reactor, a set of reactor design codes and 
standards must be established in accordance with the Nuclear Safety 
Design Agreement required by DOE-STD-1271, existing industry codes 
and standards should be used to the extent possible.

--- page 30 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 4 
08-05-2026 Page 4-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 9 
ACRONYMS 
ACGIH American Conference of Gove rnmental Industrial Hygienists 
ACI American Concrete Institute 
AEA Atomic Energy Act 
AGS American Glovebox Society AHJ Authority Having Jurisdiction 
AISC American Institute of Steel Construction 
ANS American Nuclear Society 
ANSI American National Standards Institute 
ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Re frigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers 
BNA Baseline Needs Assessment 
BPVC Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code 
CD Critical Decision 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CMAA Crane Manufacturing Association of America 
COR Code of Record 
CRD Contractor Requirements Document 
CSE Cognizant System Engineer 
CSP Criticality Safety Program 
DBA Design Basis Accident 
DOE Department of Energy 
DNFSB Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board 
DSA Documented Safety Analysis 
E.O. Executive Order 
FHA Fire Hazards Analysis 
FPE Fire Protection Engineer

--- page 31 ---
Attachment 4 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 4-2 08-05-2026 
G Guide 
HDBK Handbook 
HEPA High efficiency particulate air 
ICC International Code Council 
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission 
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IES Illuminating Engineering Society 
ISA International Society of Automation 
M Manual 
MPFL Maximum Possible Fire Loss 
NCRP National Council on Radiati on Protection and Measurements 
NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
NNSA National Nuclear Security Administration 
NPH Natural Phenomena Hazards 
NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
O Order 
P Policy 
SBAA Safety Basis Approval Authority 
SSC Structures, syst ems, and components 
STD Standard 
TEMA Tank Equipment Manufacturers Association

--- page 32 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 5 
08-05-2026 Page 5-1 
 
ATTACHMENT 5 
REFERENCES 
The following reference documents and information sources are cited to assist in implementing 
this Order.  This attachment does not provide a complete listing of industry codes and standards 
that may be needed. 
1. Public Law (P. L.). 
a. P. L. 83-703, Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
b. P. L. 94-580, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), 
as amended. 
c. P. L. 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, 
as amended. 
2. Executive Orders (E.O.) and Federal Policies. 
a. E.O. 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program,” February 1, 1982. 
b. Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, National Interagency Fire Center, 
1995 (R 2001). 
c. Secretarial Delegation Order Number 00-033.00C, August 12, 2016. 
3. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). 
a. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management. 
b. 10 CFR § 835, Occupational Radiation Protection. 
c. 10 CFR § 851, Worker Safety and Health Program. 
d. 29 CFR § 1910, Occupational Safety and Health Standards. 
e. 29 CFR § 1926, Safety and Health Regulations for Construction. 
f. 48 CFR § 970, Section 970.5223-1, “Integration of Environment, Safety, and 
Health into Work Planning and Execution.” 
4. Department of Energy (DOE) Directives. 
a. DOE Policy 420.1, Department of Energy Nuclear Safety Policy, 
February 8, 2011. 
b. DOE Order (O) 227.1A, Independent Oversight Program, December 21, 2015. 
c. DOE O 420.2C, Safety of Accelerator Facilities, July 21, 2011.

--- page 33 ---
Attachment 5 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 5-2 08-05-2026 
d. DOE Guide (G) 414.1-2B Chg. 2, Quality Assurance Program Guide, 
May 8, 2013. 
e. DOE G 414.1-4, Safety Software Guide for use with 10 CFR 830 Subpart A, 
Quality Assurance Requirements, and DOE O 414.1C, Quality Assurance, 
November 3, 2010. 
f. DOE G 420.1-1A, Nonreactor Nuclear Safety Design Criteria for Use with DOE 
O 420.1, Facility Safety, December 4, 2012. 
5. DOE Technical Standards (STDs). 
a. DOE-STD-1020-2016, Natural Phenomena Hazards Analysis and Design 
Criteria for DOE Facilities. 
b. NE-STD-1027-1992, Chg. 1, Hazard Categorization and Accident Analysis 
Techniques for Compliance with DOE Order 5480.23, Nuclear Safety 
Analysis Reports. 
c. DOE-STD-1066-2023, Fire Protection. 
d. DOE-STD-1073-2016, Configuration Management. 
e. DOE-STD-1090-2011, Hoisting and Rigging.  (Formerly Hoisting and 
Rigging Manual). 
f. DOE-STD-1098-2008, Radiological Control. 
g. DOE-STD-1104-2016, Review and Approval of Nuclear Facility Safety Basis and 
Safety Design Basis Documents. 
h. DOE-STD-1128-2013, Guide of Good Practices for Occupational Radiological 
Protection in Plutonium Facilities. 
i. DOE-STD-1158-2010, Self-Assessment Standard for DOE Contractor Criticality 
Safety Programs. 
j. DOE-STD-1186-2016, Specific Administrative Controls. 
k. DOE-STD-1195-2011, Design of Safety Significant Safety Instrumented Systems 
Used at DOE Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities. 
l. DOE-STD-1212-2012, Explosives Safety. 
m. DOE-STD-1271-2025 Authorization Pathway for Nuclear Facilities 
n. DOE-STD-1628-2013, Development of Probabilistic Risk Assessments for 
Nuclear Safety Applications. 
o. DOE-STD-3007-2017, Preparing Criticality Safety Evaluations at DOE 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facilities.

--- page 34 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 5 
08-05-2026 Page 5-3 
 
p. DOE-STD-3009-94, Preparation Guide for U.S. Department of Energy 
Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented Safety Analyses, Chg. Notice 3, 
March 2006. 
q. DOE-STD-3009-2014, Preparation of Nonreactor Nuclear Facility Documented 
Safety Analysis. 
r. DOE-STD-3020-2015, Specifications for HEPA Filters Used by 
DOE Contractors. 
s. DOE-STD-3024-2011, Content of System Design Descriptions. 
6. DOE Handbooks (HDBKs). 
a. DOE-HDBK-1132-1999, Design Considerations. 
b. DOE-HDBK-1163-2003, Integration of Multiple Hazard Analysis Requirements 
and Activities. 
c. DOE-HDBK-1169-2003, Nuclear Air Cleaning Handbook. 
7. Department of Defense. 
a. Military (MIL)-STD-1472F, Department of Defense Design Criteria Standard: 
Human Engineering, August 1999. 
8. American Concrete Institute (ACI). 
a. ACI 349-06, Code Requirements for Nuclear Safety-Related Concrete Structures 
(ACI 349-06) and Commentary, 2006. 
9. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 
a. ACGIH 2096, Industrial Ventilation: A Manual of Recommended Practices for 
Design, January 2010. 
10. American Glovebox Society (AGS). 
a. AGS-G006-2005, Standard of Practice for the Design and Fabrication of Nuclear 
Application Gloveboxes, 2005. 
11. American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
a. ANSI N13.1-2011, Guide to Sampling and Monitoring Releases of Airborne 
Radioactive Substances from the Stacks and Ducts of Nuclear Facilities, 2011. 
b. ANSI N43.2-2001 (R2010), Radiation Safety for X-ray Diffraction and 
Fluorescence Analysis Equipment, 2001.

--- page 35 ---
Attachment 5 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 5-4 08-05-2026 
c. ANSI N278.1-1975 (R1992), Self-Operated and Power-Operated Safety-Related 
Valves Functional Specification Standard, 1975. 
d. ANSI N323D-2002, American National Standard for Installed Radiation 
Protection Instrumentation, 2002. 
e. ANSI/AIHA Z9.2-2012, Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of 
Local Exhaust Ventilation Systems, 2012. 
f. ANSI Z358.1-2009, American National Standard for Emergency Eyewash and 
Shower Equipment, 2009. 
12. American National Standards Institute/American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC). 
a. AISC 325:2011, Steel Construction Manual, 2011. 
b. ANSI/AISC 360:10, Specification for Structural Steel Buildings, 2010. 
c. ANSI/AISC N690-12, Specification for Safety-Related Steel Structures for 
Nuclear Facilities, 2012. 
13. American National Standards Institute/American Nuclear Society (ANS). 
a. ANSI/ANS-1-2000 (R2007) (R2012), Conduct of Critical Experiments, 2000. 
b. ANSI/ANS-6.4.2-2006, Specification for Radiation Shielding Materials, 2006. 
c. ANSI/ANS-8 Series Standards. 
d. ANSI/ANS-8.1-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable 
Materials Outside Reactors, 2014. 
e. ANSI/ANS-8.3-1997 (R2003) (R2012), Criticality Accident Alarm System, 1997. 
f. ANSI/ANS-8.15-2014, Nuclear Criticality Safety Control of Selected Actinide 
Nuclides, 2014. 
g. ANSI/ANS-14.1-2004 (R2009) (R2014), Operation of Fast Pulse Reactors, 2004. 
h. ANSI/ANS-58.8-1994 (R2001) (R2008), Time Response Design Criteria for 
Safety-Related Operator Actions, 1994. 
i. ANSI/ANS-58.9-2002 (R2015), Single Failure Criteria for LWR Safety-Related 
Fluid Systems, 1981. 
14. American National Standards Institute/International Society of Automation (ISA). 
a. ANSI/ISA 7.0.01-1996, Quality Standard for Instrument Air, 1996. 
b. ANSI/ISA 18.1-1979 (R2004), Annunciator Sequences and Specifications, 1979.

--- page 36 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 5 
08-05-2026 Page 5-5 
 
c. ANSI/ISA 67.01.01-2002 (R2007), Transducer and Transmitter Installation for 
Nuclear Safety Applications, 2002. 
d. ANSI/ISA S67.02.01-1999, Nuclear-Safety-Related Instrument Sensing Line 
Piping and Tubing Standard for Use in Nuclear Power Plants, 1999. 
e. ANSI/ISA 67.04.01-2006 (R2011), Setpoints for Nuclear Safety-Related 
Instrumentation, 2006. 
15. American Petroleum Institute (API). 
a. API-620, Design and Construction of Large, Welded, Low-Pressure Storage 
Tanks, 2013. 
b. API-650, Welded Tanks for Oil Storage, 2013. 
16. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). 
a. ASHRAE Handbook, Fundamentals (Inch-Pound Edition), 2013. 
b. ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2010, Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality, 
2010. 
17. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
a. ASME AG-1-2015, Code on Nuclear Air and Gas Treatment, 2015. 
b. ASME BPVC, Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 2015. 
c. ASME B16.5-2013, Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: NPS ½ through NPS 24 
Metric/Inch Standard, 2013. 
d. ASME B30.2-2011, Overhead and Gantry Cranes (Top Running Bridge, Single 
or Multiple Girder, Top Running Trolley Hoist), 2011. 
e. ASME B31.3-2014, Process Piping, 2014. 
f. ASME B73.1-2012, Specification for Horizontal End Suction Centrifugal Pumps 
for Chemical Process, 2012. 
g. ASME B73.2-2003 (R2009), Specifications for Vertical In-Line Centrifugal 
Pumps for Chemical Process, 2003. 
h. ASME NOG-1-2010, Rules for Construction of Overhead and Gantry Cranes 
(Top Running Bridge, Multiple Girder), 2010.

--- page 37 ---
Attachment 5 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 5-6 08-05-2026 
i. ASME NUM-1-2009, Rules for Construction of Cranes, Monorails, and Hoists 
(with Bridge or Trolley or Hoist of the Underhung Type), 2009. 
j. ASME NQA-1-2012, Quality Assurance Requirements for Nuclear Facility 
Applications, 2013. 
18. ASTM International. 
a. ASTM C852-09, Standard Guide for Design Criteria for Plutonium Gloveboxes, 
2009. 
b. ASTM C1455-14e1, Standard Test Method for Nondestructive Assay of Special 
Nuclear Material Holdup Using Gamma-Ray Spectroscopic Methods, 2014. 
19. American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
a. AWWA D100-11, Welded Carbon Steel Tanks for Water Storage, 2011. 
20. Crane Manufacturers Association of America (CMAA). 
a. CMAA Standards, as applicable. 
21. Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (DNFSB). 
a. DNFSB Recommendation 2004-2, Active Confinement Systems. 
22. Hydraulic Institute Standards. 
a. Hydraulic Institute Standards, as applicable. 
23. Illuminating Engineering Society (IES). 
a. IES HB-10-11, IES Lighting Handbook, 2011. 
24. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)/International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC). 
a. IEEE C2-2017, National Electrical Safety Code, 2017. 
b. IEEE C37 Standards Collection, Power Switchgears, Substations, and Relays, 
Standards on switchgear as applicable, 2010. 
c. IEEE N42.18-2004, American National Standard Specification and Performance 
of On-Site Instrumentation for Continuously Monitoring Radioactivity in 
Effluents, 2004. 
d. IEEE N323D-2002, American National Standard to Installed Radiation 
Protection Instrumentation, 2003. 
e. IEEE 7-4.3.2-2016, IEEE Standard Criteria for Programmable Digital Devices in 
Safety Systems of Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2016.

--- page 38 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 5 
08-05-2026 Page 5-7 
 
f. IEEE 80-2013, IEEE Guide for Safety in AC Substation Grounding, 2013. 
g. IEEE 141-1993 (R1999), IEEE Recommended Practice for Electric Power 
Distribution for Industrial Plants, 1993. 
h. IEEE 142-2007, IEEE Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and 
Commercial Power Systems, 2007. 
i. IEEE 242-2001, IEEE Recommended Practice for Protection and Coordination of 
Industrial and Commercial Power Systems (IEEE Buff Book), 2001. 
j. IEEE 308-2012, IEEE Standard Criteria for Class 1E Power Systems for Nuclear 
Power Generating Stations, 2012. 
k. IEEE 323-2003 (R2008), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Equipment for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2003. 
l. IEEE 334-2006 (R2012), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Continuous Duty Class 
1E Motors for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
m. IEEE 336-2010, IEEE Recommended Practice for Installation, Inspection, and 
Testing for Class 1E Power, Instrumentation, and Control Equipment at Nuclear 
Facilities, 2010. 
n. IEEE 338-2012, IEEE Standard for Criteria for the Periodic Surveillance Testing 
of Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety, 2012. 
o. IEEE 344-2013, IEEE Standard for Seismic Qualification of Equipment for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2013. 
p. IEEE 352-1987, IEEE Guide for General Principles of Reliability Analysis of 
Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety Systems, 1987. 
q. IEEE 379-2014, IEEE Standard for Application of the Single-Failure Criterion to 
Nuclear Power Generating Station Safety Systems, 2014. 
r. IEEE 382-2006, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Safety-Related Actuators for 
Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
s. IEEE 383-2015, IEEE Standard for Qualifying Electric Cables and Splices for 
Nuclear Facilities, 2015. 
t. IEEE 384-2008, IEEE Standard Criteria for Independence of Class 1E Equipment 
and Circuits, 2008. 
u. IEEE 387-1995 (R2007), IEEE Standard Criteria for Diesel Generator Units 
Applied as Standby Power Supplies for Nuclear Power Generation Stations, 1995. 
v. IEEE 399-1997, IEEE Recommended Practice for Industrial and Commercial 
Power Systems Analysis (IEEE Brown Book), 1997.

--- page 39 ---
Attachment 5 DOE O 420.1D 
Page 5-8 08-05-2026 
w. IEEE 420-2013, IEEE Standard for the Design and Qualification of Class 1E 
Control Boards, Panels, and Racks Used in Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 
2013. 
x. IEEE 446-1995 (R2000), IEEE Recommended Practice for Emergency and 
Standby Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications, 1995. 
y. IEEE 450-2010, IEEE Recommended Practice for Maintenance, Testing, and 
Replacement of Vented Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary Applications, 2010. 
z. IEEE 484-2002, IEEE Recommended Practice for Installation Design and 
Installation of Vented Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary Applications, 2002. 
aa. IEEE 493-2007, IEEE Recommended Practice for the Design of Reliable 
Industrial and Commercial Power Systems, 2007. 
bb. IEEE 535-2013, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Class 1E Vented Lead Acid 
Storage Batteries for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2013. 
cc. IEEE 577-2012, IEEE Standard Requirements for Reliability Analysis in the 
Design and Operation of Safety Systems for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 
2012. 
dd. IEEE 603-2009, IEEE Standard Criteria for Safety Systems for Nuclear Power 
Generating Stations, 2009. 
ee. IEEE 627-2010, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Equipment Used in Nuclear 
Facilities, 2010. 
ff. IEEE 628-2011, IEEE Standard Criteria for the Design, Installation, and 
Qualification of Raceway Systems for Class 1E Circuits for Nuclear Power 
Generating Stations, 2011. 
gg. IEEE 649-2006 (R2011), IEEE Standard for Qualifying Class 1E Motor Control 
Centers for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
hh. IEEE 650-2006, IEEE Standard for Qualification of Class 1E Static Battery 
Chargers and Inverters for Nuclear Power Generating Stations, 2006. 
ii. IEEE 833-2005 (R2011), IEEE Recommended Practice for the Protection of 
Electric Equipment in Nuclear Power Generating Stations from Water Hazards, 
2005. 
jj. IEEE 946-2004, IEEE Recommended Practice for the Design of DC Auxiliary 
Power Systems for Generating Systems, 2004.

--- page 40 ---
DOE O 420.1D Attachment 5 
08-05-2026 Page 5-9 
 
kk. IEEE 1023-2004 (R2010), IEEE Recommended Practice for the Application of 
Human Factors Engineering to Systems, Equipment, and Facilities of Nuclear 
Power Generating Stations and other Nuclear Facilities, 2004. 
ll. IEEE 1050-2004, IEEE Guide for Instrumentation and Control Equipment 
Grounding in Generating Stations, 2004. 
25. International Code Council (ICC). 
a. ICC, International Building Code, 2015. 
26. International Society of Automation (ISA). 
a. ISA-TR84.00.06, Safety Fieldbus Design Considerations for Process Industry 
Sector Applications, 2009. 
27. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP). 
a. NCRP Report 49, “Structural Shielding Design and Evaluation for Medical Use of 
X Rays and Gamma Rays of Energies Up to 10 MeV,” 1976. 
28. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
a. NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, 2015. 
b. NFPA 70, National Electric Code, 2017. 
c. NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, 2016. 
d. NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2015. 
e. NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems, 2016. 
f. NFPA 780, Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems, 2017. 
g. NFPA 1143, Standard for Wildland Fire Management, 2014. 
29. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
a. NUREG-0700, Human-System Interface Design Review Guidelines, 2002. 
30. Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association (TEMA). 
a. TEMA, 9th Edition TEMA Standards: Standards on Heat Exchangers Classes B, 
C, and R. Appendix F, Concluding Material. New York, 2007.
