--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of the Chief Information Officer 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, DC  
 
Approved: 12-3-2012 
Chg 1(Admin Chg): 1-16-2013 
Chg 2 (MinChg): 1-13-2017 
 
SUBJECT: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
1. PURPOSE. To provide the Department of Energy (DOE) Elements, including the 
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), with Information Technology (IT) 
Project Management guidance for the acquisition and management of IT projects and 
initiatives. Common IT Project Management requirements will ensure that IT projects are 
delivered within the original performance baseline, cost, and schedule and fully meet 
Mission performance, safety, safeguards, and security standards in alignment with section 
5123 of Public Law (P.L.) 104-106, Performance and Results Based Management and the 
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA). 
a. To responsibly manage IT projects that will improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of DOE operations and, as appropriate, the delivery of services to 
the public; 
b. To establish communications within the Office of the Chief Information Officer 
(OCIO) and across all DOE Elements for DOE Enterprise-wide IT projects; 
c. To align decision making within the OCIO and across all DOE Elements for 
Department–wide IT projects; and 
d. To reduce duplication of effort and the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) for DOE 
IT projects. 
2. CANCELLATION. DOE Guide (G) 200.1-1 to 200.1-1 Chapter 10, Software Engineering 
Methodology Guide. 
3. DEPARTMENTAL APPLICABILITY. 
a. Scope. Except for the exclusions in section 3b and equivalencies and exemptions 
in section 3d, the scope of IT projects covered by this Order (O) includes projects:  
(1) With a Total Project Cost (TPC) equal to or more than $25 Million (M); 
(2) With an impact on more than one DOE Element; or 
(3) As determined by the Undersecretary or Head of Element, based on risk 
management, mission, priorities, or national interest. 
b. Exclusion. IT projects that are covered by or are a component under a Capital Asset 
Project covered by DOE O 413.3B, Program and Project Management for the 
Acquisition of Capital Assets, are excluded from this O 415.1.
DOE O 415.1

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 415.1 
 12-3-2012 
 
c. IT Project Management. All IT projects require formal IT Project Management. IT 
projects that do not meet the scope of this Order are required to be managed using a 
standardized approach as specified and approved by the sponsoring/funding 
organization. 
d. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 415.1. Equivalencies and exemptions to 
this Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1C, Departmental 
Directives Program. The following equivalencies and exemptions are included in 
this Order. 
(1) Exemption. Consistent with Secretarial Delegation DOE O 00-033.00B, To 
the Administrator and Chief Executive Office (CEO) of Bonneville Power 
Administration (BPA), this Order does not apply to BPA. 
(2) Exemption. This Order does not apply to Financial Assistance Awards 
(FAA), grants, and cooperative agreements covered under 10 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 600, Financial Assistance Rules. 
(3) Exemption. An Office of Science User Facility, which is a Federally 
sponsored research facility available for external use to advance scientific or 
technical knowledge under the conditions defined in the Office of Science, 
Definition of a User Facility, dated, January 6, 2012. 
(4) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order (E.O.) 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion 
Program, codified at 50 United States Code (USC) sections 2406 and 2511 
and to ensure consistency through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Program (NNPP), the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors 
will implement and oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this 
Order for activities under the Director's cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(5) Equivalency. DOE Elements that meet all of the following criteria may 
demonstrate alignment with specific requirements of this Order. The intent 
of this equivalency is to delegate authority to the DOE Elements with the 
following: 
(a) Established IT Project Management Offices (IT PMO) with 
documented and approved Project Management requirements, 
processes, and procedures. 
(b) Established IT governance policies and procedures that are 
consistently used throughout the DOE Element with demonstrated 
success. 
(c) Demonstrated record of completing IT projects where completed 
projects:

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 415.1  3 
12-3-2012 
 
 
1 Do not exceed a cost variance of more than +/- 10% of the 
stated cost baseline established for the original, approved 
scope of work approved as part of the Detailed Design 
Review (DDR); 
2 Do not exceed a project schedule variance of more than 
+/- 10% of the stated schedule baseline established for the 
original approved scope of work as part of the DDR; and 
3 Meet the functionality requirements documented in the 
stated approved scope of work as part of the DDR. 
(d) Requirement that DOE Elements having this equivalency are still 
responsible for reporting and coordinating projects that impact 
multiple DOE Elements. 
(6) DOE Elements that are eligible for the equivalency must take affirmative 
action and obtain confirmation of the equivalency with an action 
memorandum from the OCIO or designated authority. 
(7) The Administrator, NNSA, will ensure that NNSA employees and 
contractors comply with their respective responsibilities under this Order. 
Nothing in this Order will be construed to interfere with the NNSA 
Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of P.L. 106-65, National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, to establish 
Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
(8) For DOE contractors, except for the equivalencies and exemptions in 
section 3d and as stated above, the Contractor Requirements Document 
(CRD), see Attachment 1, sets forth requirements of this Order that will 
apply to contracts that include the CRD. The CRD must be included in IT 
Program/Project Management and services contracts. As the laws, 
regulations, and the DOE Directive clause 970.5204-2 of IT Project 
Management and services contracts state, regardless of the performer of the 
work, Site/Facility management contractors with the CRD in Attachment 1 
incorporated into their contracts are responsible for compliance with the 
requirements of the CRD. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Successful management of IT projects requires the application of knowledge, 
skills, tools, techniques, and resources to ensure that the IT system or asset meets 
or exceeds the stakeholders’ needs and expectations. To deliver IT investments, 
assets, and projects on the stated performance baseline (including within budget, 
on schedule, and fully capable of meeting mission performance, safety, 
safeguards, and security standards) and to ensure the implementation of this 
Order, the following project artifacts must be developed and maintained by each

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 415.1 
 12-3-2012 
 
DOE Element responsible for IT projects. 
(1) A Project Management Plan (PMP) that includes: 
(a) Budget and resources; 
(b) Key decision points; and 
(c) Description of the Project Management tools and reports that will 
be used during the project. 
(2) Alternative Analysis. 
(3) Requirements Document approved by the Project Manager (PM) and the 
customer that outlines functional, operational, and acceptance criteria. 
(4) Project Schedule documenting the entire lifecycle of the project. 
(5) Configuration Management and Change Control Plan. 
(6) Risk Management Plan. 
(7) Cyber Security Plan. 
b. Implementation of IT Project Management methodologies, tools, and techniques 
that: 
(1) Establish the project scope, schedule, and budget; 
(2) Hold the PM accountable for delivering the project within cost, scope, and 
schedule; 
(3) Align the IT investment to the Departmental and/or Organizational Strategic 
Plan and objectives; 
(4) Establish clearly defined metrics and business value based objectives; 
(5) Are consistent with the appropriate statutory, regulatory, Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB), and Departmental requirements; 
(6) Ensure the products or services are produced according to requirements and 
specifications, on time, and within budget; 
(7) Ensure reporting to the Acquisition Executive (AE), IT Project Manager (IT 
PM), and DOE Element’s leadership, as appropriate, on project 
performance and status; 
(8) Strengthen line management accountability for successful IT Project 
Management results;

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 415.1  5 (and 6) 
12-3-2012 
 
 
(9) Implement formal Stage Gates or transition points during the project’s life 
cycle to validate that the project is proceeding as planned and a go, no-go, 
or hold decision is made; 
(10) Establish a DOE Enterprise culture that recognizes the need to manage risk, 
control cost and schedules, and invest in DOE Enterprise-wide projects with 
the goal of meeting DOE Mission schedules. Invest in DOE Enterprise-wide 
IT projects with the goal of meeting DOE Mission objectives on budget, on 
schedule, and with the functionality required; and 
(11) Tailor projects and apply Value Measuring Methodology and Modular 
Development, as appropriate. 
c. Establishment of an IT asset/project inventory. 
d. Requirements for Implementation. Implementation of the requirements contained 
in this Order must be documented in an Implementation Plan within 6 months of the 
issuance of this Order. The Implementation Plan must ensure that this Order is fully 
implemented within 1 year. IT projects initiated prior to the issuance of this Order 
may continue to adhere to the management and reporting requirements established 
for the project, and the IT PMs of these projects must coordinate with the DOE 
Corporate IT PMO on reporting and monitoring. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. See Responsibilities, Appendix A. 
6. REFERENCES. See References, Attachment 3. 
Additional References: 
a. Acronyms, Attachment 2 
b. Glossary of Terms, Attachment 4 
7. CONTACT. For assistance, contact the Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
202-586-0166. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 ELIZABETH SHERWOOD-RANDALL 
 Deputy Secretary

--- page 6 ---


--- page 7 ---
DOE O 415.1 i (and ii) 
12-3-2012 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
APPENDIX A: RESPONSIBILITIES  
1. NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (NNSA).
................................................................................................................................................
1 
2. DOE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (CIO). ................................................................. 
1 
3. DOE CORPORATE IT PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE (PMO)
................................................................................................................................................
2 
4. DOE UNDER SECRETARIES, NNSA ADMINISTRATOR/HEADS OF FIELD 
ELEMENTS.
................................................................................................................................................
2 
5. PROGRAM MANAGERS AND HEADS OF FIELD ORGANIZATIONS.
................................................................................................................................................
3 
6. CONTRACTING OFFICER (CO).
................................................................................................................................................
4 
7. DOE CHIEF ARCHITECT (SEE DOE O 200.1A).
................................................................................................................................................
4 
8. CHIEF HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICER.
................................................................................................................................................
4 
9. ACQUISITION EXECUTIVE (AE).
................................................................................................................................................
4 
DOE ORDER 415.1 -  LIST OF ATTACHMENTS:  
Attachment 1: CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT

--- page 8 ---
Appendix A  DOE O XXX.X 
Page A-2  DRAFT XX-XX-XX 
 
Attachment 2: ACRONYMS  
Attachment 3: REFERENCES 
Attachment 4: GLOSSARY OF TERMS

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 415.1 Appendix A 
12-3-2012 A-1 
 
 
APPENDIX A  
RESPONSIBILITIES  
1. NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (NNSA).  
For all actions on NNSA Information Technology (IT) Programs, projects, and 
investments, the Administrator, NNSA, maintains responsibility and has the authority 
to delegate responsibilities and authority for implementing the relevant requirements 
and responsibilities of this Order (O). This includes, but is not limited to, designating 
Project Managers (PMs), establishing Nuclear Security Enterprise-wide IT-related 
metrics, delegating decision-making authority relating to NNSA IT project execution, 
providing oversight on NNSA IT projects, and implementing corrective actions. 
2. DOE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (CIO). 
a. Serves as the Department of Energy (DOE) Senior Manager responsible and 
accountable for implementing the provisions of the DOE Secretary Delegation O 
No. 00-031.00A, To the Chief Information Officer, which delegates to the CIO the 
responsibility of oversight and reporting on IT projects across the DOE Enterprise 
in a collaborative manner that: 
(1) Reinforces and enhances guidance on formalized IT Project Management to 
meet the DOE expectation that IT projects are effectively managed, meeting 
business needs and providing transparency through reporting in a timely 
manner; and 
(2) Acknowledges the mission focus or line management responsibilities of 
DOE Elements and fosters a core competency for supporting DOE 
Enterprise-wide IT initiatives. 
b. Matures DOE IT project planning, coordination, and cooperation in an effort to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of IT across all DOE Elements. 
c. Oversees the development and implementation of IT project policies, standards, 
and guidelines that align with the DOE Mission, as well as legislative and 
regulatory policies and procedures. 
d. Identifies special interest projects and ensure that appropriate Senior Executive 
Level reviews are provided for those projects. 
e. Establishes and maintains a DOE-wide process for certifying IT PMs. 
f. Affirms equivalencies as defined in DOE O 415.1. 
g. Promotes Enterprise Architecture (EA) as defined in DOE O 200.1A, Information 
Technology Management.

--- page 10 ---
Appendix A DOE O 415.1 
Page A-2 12-3-2012 
 
h. Promotes Information Technology Strategic Planning. 
i. Identifies critical DOE IT investments and ensure that they are tracked in the 
Strategic Plan. 
(1) Review the results of internal and external compliance assessments and 
provide transparency across the Agency; 
(2) Ensure that IT assets are acquired and information resources are managed 
consistent with statutory, Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and 
Departmental requirements and priorities; and 
(3) Ensure the development and management of an optimal IT portfolio that 
best supports Programmatic needs. 
j. Promotes Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) as defined in 
DOE O 200.1A. 
(1) Ensures the integration and alignment of the CPIC process and tools with IT 
Project Management, EA, and other management processes; and 
(2) Provides a means for Senior Management to monitor IT investments in 
terms of cost, schedule, and requirements. 
3. DOE CORPORATE IT PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE (PMO). 
a. Supports the development, implementation, and maintenance of policies, 
templates, and procedures necessary to implement this Order. 
(1) Collects, analyzes, and disseminates lessons learned and best practices; 
(2) Provides assistance and guidance to DOE line Project Management 
Organizations managing IT projects covered by this Order; 
(3) Ensures coordination and collaboration within the Office of the Chief 
Information Officer (OCIO) Organization, including Capital Planning, EA, 
Cybersecurity, and Energy IT Services; and 
(4) Implements processes to consolidate and report on IT project status. 
b. Ensures coordination and collaboration with DOE Elements on IT Project 
Management. 
4. DOE UNDER SECRETARIES, NNSA ADMINISTRATOR/HEADS OF FIELD 
ELEMENTS. 
a. Maintain stewardship of Federal IT resources and ensure they are used efficiently 
and effectively to achieve intended program results.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 415.1 Appendix A 
12-3-2012 A-3 
 
 
(1) Ensure sound application of IT Project Management practices for planning, 
management, budgeting, execution review, and reporting that demonstrates 
projects are effectively managed; 
(2) Ensure that all IT PMs have the appropriate qualifications required based on 
the size and complexity of the project to manage successful completion of 
the project; and 
(3) Ensure projects have established and monitored performance measures that 
align with the DOE and Program Mission. 
b. Take systematic and proactive measures to establish cost-effective and 
appropriate internal controls. 
c. Ensure IT Organizations within their control are properly informed of this Order 
and identify and report on IT projects governed by this Order, as required. 
d. Ensure Program Offices establish additional process-specific quality requirements to 
be implemented under a Quality Assurance Program (QAP) for the control of 
suspect/counterfeit items (S/CIs) and nuclear-safety software, as defined in 
DOE O 414.1D, Quality Assurance. 
e. Ensure IT acquisitions not subject to review by the Energy Systems 
Acquisition Advisory Board (ESAAB) will continue to follow their 
respective program office approval process, which will include the CIO or 
the CIO's designee as a full participant whenever executive-level approval is 
required, followed by a review through the Information Management 
Governance Board (IMGB). 
f. Ensure headquarters-managed projects and program offices without an IT 
project approval process, or at the election of the CIO based on a risk 
assessment, an Investment Review Board (IRB), under the auspices of the 
IMGB, will be convened to provide formal review and approval of IT 
projects. With respect to NNSA projects, the CIO may solicit an advisory 
review from the IRB. 
g. Notify Contracting Officers (COs) of contracts affected by the requirements of 
this Order. 
5. PROGRAM MANAGERS AND HEADS OF FIELD ORGANIZATIONS. 
a. Direct initial project planning and execution roles for projects assigned by Senior 
Management. 
b. Establish the initial Integrated Project Team (IPT) in advance of the designation 
of an IT PM, when required.

--- page 12 ---
Appendix A DOE O 415.1 
Page A-4 12-3-2012 
 
c. Oversee development of project definition, technical scope, and budget to support 
Mission need. 
d. Assign an IT PM, as appropriate, and PMs with the training, experience, and 
skills necessary to meet the requirements of the project objectives, budget, and 
schedule. 
e. Oversee the project line management Organization, and ensure the line project 
teams have the necessary experience, expertise, and training in IT Life Cycle 
Management (LCM), including budget and schedule performance 
management. 
f. Develop project performance measures, and monitor and evaluate project 
performance throughout the project ensuring compliance with DOE standards, 
security requirements, and other mandates. 
g. Report the cost, schedule, and performance on a monthly basis for all IT projects 
governed by this Order to the OCIO Corporate IT PMO. Steady State (SS) 
performance is reported through the CPIC process. 
h. Identify and correct all reportable problems including cost, schedule, and scope in 
a timely and effective manner. 
i. Ensure Site/Facility management, support services, and systems development 
contractors are responsible for flowing down the requirements of the Contractor 
Requirements Document (CRD) to subcontractors at any tier, to the extent 
necessary, to ensure IT Program/Project Management and services contractors’ 
compliance with the requirements. 
j. Manage the tailoring of IT investments. 
6. CONTRACTING OFFICER (CO). 
Once notified, COs are responsible for incorporating this Order into the affected contracts 
via the laws, regulations, and DOE Directives clause of the contracts. Requirements 
identified as solely a Federal function will not be incorporated into contracts. 
7. DOE CHIEF ARCHITECT (SEE DOE O 200.1A). 
Identifies opportunities for improving the integration of EA and CPIC processes to 
maturity and enhance IT Project Management. 
8. CHIEF HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICER. Refer to DOE O 414.1D, 
Quality Assurance, for applicability, as appropriate.

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 415.1 Appendix A 
12-3-2012 A-5 (and A-6) 
 
 
9. ACQUISITION EXECUTIVE (AE). 
Each designated AE is guided by the specific limits of their delegated authority (see 
DOE/NNSA Senior Procurement Executive for contract award and modification execution 
authority). There can only be one designated AE per project. 
a. Monitors the effectiveness of IT PMs and their support staff; 
b. Approves project changes in compliance with the appropriately defined change 
control levels and funding profile changes; 
c. Conducts Quarterly Project Reviews (QPRs); and 
d. Explicitly addresses integration of safety into design and construction for Hazard 
Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities as a key consideration in the QPRs and 
approval of project Stage Gates.

--- page 14 ---


--- page 15 ---
DOE O 415.1  Attachment 1 
12-3-2012  Page 1 (and Page 2) 
 
 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE ORDER (O) 415.1, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
1. This CRD establishes the requirements for the Department of Energy (DOE) Information 
Technology (IT) contractors with access to DOE information systems. Contractors must 
comply with the requirements listed in this CRD. 
2. Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with 
and flowing down the appropriate requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier, to 
the extent necessary, to ensure the contractors’ compliance with the requirements. That is, 
the contractor will ensure that it and its subcontractors cost effectively comply with the 
requirements of this CRD and incur only those costs that are reasonable and would be 
incurred by a prudent person in the conduct of a competitive business. 
3. The contractor, using a formal IT Project Management process with a graded approach to 
project risk management, based on best business practices (BBPs), must develop a 
Project Management approach for IT investments that: 
(a) Foster IT investments that support DOE Program and Mission goals; 
(b) Describe the management methods, organization, control systems, 
and documentation for projects; and 
(c) Monitor and control projects through Project Management practices. 
4. For Federally directed IT investments with a Total Project Cost (TPC) of $25 Million (M) or 
more, the contractor must follow the appropriate Program Office direction for IT Project 
Management.

--- page 16 ---


--- page 17 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 2 
12-3-2012 Page 1 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
ACRONYMS. The acronyms listed in the following table are for terms used in the Department of 
Energy (DOE) Order (O) 415.1, Information Technology Project Management, including the 
appendix and the attachments. 
Acronym Definition 
AE Acquisition Executive 
BBP best business practices 
BPA Bonneville Power Administration 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CIO Chief Information Officer 
CO Contracting Officer 
COTS commercial-off-the-shelf 
CPIC Capital Planning and Investment Control 
CRD Contractor Requirements Document 
DDR Detailed Design Review 
DO Delegating Official 
DOE Department of Energy 
EA Enterprise Architecture 
ESAAB Energy Systems Acquisition Advisory Board 
FAA Financial Assistance Awards 
FASA Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act 
FITARA Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act 
FTE Full Time Employee 
G Guide 
GAO Government Accountability Office 
HQ Headquarters 
IMGB Information Management Governance Board 
IPT Integrated Project Team 
IT Information Technology 
IT PM IT Project Manager 
IT PMO IT Project Management Office 
LMC Life Cycle Management 
M Million

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2 DOE O 415.1 
Page 2 12-3-2012 
 
NNPP Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program 
NNSA National Nuclear Security Administration 
O Order 
OCIO Office of the Chief Information Officer 
OMB Office of Management and Budget 
P.L. Public Law 
PM Project Manager 
PMO Project Management Office 
PMP Project Management Plan 
QAP Quality Assurance Program 
QPR Quarterly Project Review 
S/CIs suspect/counterfeit items 
SS Steady State 
TCO Total Cost of Ownership 
TPC Total Project Cost 
USC United States Code

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 3 
12-3-2012 Page 1 
 
 
REFERENCES  
REFERENCES. This attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with the 
Department of Energy (DOE) Order (O) 415.1 as well as information and/or requirements applicable 
to contracts in which the associated Contractor Requirements Document (DOE O 415.1, 
Information Technology Project Management, Attachment 1) is inserted. 
1. DOE, Secretary Delegation Order No. 00-031.00A, dated 6-7-07. 
2. DOE CIO Memorandum, Enterprise Architecture Guidance, dated 1-9-07. 
3. DOE G 413.3-2, Quality Assurance Guide for Project Management, dated 6-27-08. 
4. DOE G 413.3-18A, Integrated Project Team Guide for Formation and Implementation, 
dated 2-3-12. 
5. DOE O 200.1A, Information Technology Management, dated 12-23-08. 
6. DOE O 205.1B, Department of Energy Cybersecurity Management Program, dated 
5-16-11. 
7. DOE O 243.1A, Records Management Program, dated 11-7-11. 
8. DOE O 413.1B, Internal Control Program, dated 10-28-08. 
9. DOE O 413.3B, Program and Project Management for the Acquisition of Capital Assets, 
dated 11-29-10. 
10. DOE O 414.1D, Quality Assurance, dated 4-25-11. 
11. Executive Order 13011, Federal Information Technology, FR 61-140, dated July 19, 1996. 
12. Government Accountability Office (GAO) Report – GAO-11-826, OMB Needs to 
Improve Its Guidance on IT Investments, dated September 29, 2011. 
13. Office of Science, Definition of a User Facility Memorandum, dated January 6, 2012. 
14. OMB Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission and Execution of the Budget, dated August 
18, 2011. 
15. OMB Circular A-123, Management Accountability and Control, dated December 21, 
2004. 
16. OMB Circular A-127, Financial Management Systems, dated January 9, 2009. 
17. OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, dated November 
28, 2000.

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 3 DOE O 415.1  
Page 2 12-3-2012 
 
18. OMB Memorandum M-00-07, Incorporating and Funding Security in Information 
Systems Investments, dated February 28, 2000. 
19. OMB Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, dated August 8, 
2011. 
20. OMB Memorandum M-97-02, Funding Information Systems Investments, dated October 
25, 1996. 
21. The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, (CCA), (Public Law 104-106, Division E), dated 
February 10, 1996. 
22. The E-Government Act of 2002, (Public Law 107-347), dated December 17, 2002. 
23. The Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, Title V (FASA V), dated October 13, 
1994. 
24. The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002, dated October 24, 
2002. 
25. The Government Information Security Reform Act (GISRA - 2000), dated October 30, 
2000. 
26. The Government Paperwork Elimination Act of 1998, (Public Law 105-277, Title XVII), 
dated October 21, 1998. 
27. The Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 (GPRA) (Public Law 103-62), 
dated August 3, 1993. 
28. The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, (Public Law 104-13), dated May 22, 1995. 
29. The President’s Management Agenda, Office of Management and Budget, Fiscal 
Year 2002, dated January 29, 2001. 
30. 25 Point Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information Technology Management, 
U.S. Chief Information Officer, dated December 9, 2010. 
31. FITARA, Title VIII, Subtitle D of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for 
Fiscal Year 2015, Pub. L. No. 11 3-291, dated December 19, 2014. 
32. OMB Memorandum, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, 
M-15-14, June 10, 2015.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 4 
12-3-2012 Page 1 
 
 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS  
GLOSSARY OF TERMS. The Glossary of Terms listed in the following table provides 
definitions to the terms used in The Department of Energy (DOE) Order (O) 415.1, Information 
Technology Project Management. 
Term Definition 
Acquisition Executive (AE)  The individual designated by the Secretary of Energy to integrate and unify 
the management system for a Program portfolio of projects and implement 
prescribed policies and practices. 
Acquisition Strategy  A high-level business and technical-management approach designed to 
achieve project objectives within specified resource constraints with 
recognition of key project risks and the strategies identified to handle 
those risks. It is the framework for planning, organizing, staffing, 
controlling, and leading a project. It provides a master schedule for 
activities essential for project success and for formulating functional 
strategies and plans. 
Baseline  A quantitative definition of cost, schedule, and technical performance that 
serves as a base or standard for measurement and control during the 
performance of an effort; the established plan against which the status of 
resources and the effort of the overall Program, Field Program(s), 
project(s), task(s), or subtask(s) are measured, assessed, and controlled. 
Once established, baselines are subject to a change-control discipline. 
Business Value The most important factor is the alignment between IT and business 
processes, organization structure, and strategy. At the highest levels, this 
alignment is achieved through proper integration of EA, business 
architecture, process design, organization design, and performance 
metrics. 
Capital Planning and 
Investment Control (CPIC) 
A systematic approach to managing the risk and returns of IT 
investments for a given Mission. The CPIC process is an integrated, 
structured methodology to managing IT investments, which ensures that 
IT investments align with the overall Strategic Plan and Mission in 
support of business needs while minimizing risks and maximizing 
returns throughout the investment’s life cycle. CPIC uses a systematic 
selection, control, and continual-evaluation process to ensure that an 
investment supports the overall Mission and business needs. 
Chief Information Officer 
(CIO) 
The individual responsible for overseeing the IT investment portfolio. 
Contract A contract is a mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to 
provide the specified product and obligates the buyer to pay for it.

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 4 DOE O 415.1 
Page 2 12-3-2012 
 
Term Definition 
Contracting Officer (CO) The CO has the authority to enter into, administer, and/or terminate 
contracts and make related determinations and findings. The term 
includes certain authorized representatives of the CO acting within limits 
of his/her authority as delegated by the CO. The CO and/or his/her 
representative is accountable for preparing solicitation documents with 
technical support from the IT Project Manager and acting on behalf of 
the Head of the Contracting Activity. 
Contractor Requirements 
Document (CRD) 
The DOE document that identifies the requirements that the prime 
contractor's Project Management system must satisfy. 
Cybersecurity  The protection of information systems against unauthorized access to or 
modification of information (whether in storage, processing, or transit), 
loss of accountability for information and user actions, and the denial of 
service to authorized users, including those measures necessary to protect 
against, detect, and counter such threats. 
Delegating Official (DO) The DO has the authority for approval of information technology 
projects to ensure that the proposed expenditures on IT are consistent 
with established policies, processes, budgets, and related requirements. 
Demonstrated Success  Those IT projects that have been developed through a 
defined-information-system life cycle with consistent results of project 
completion within the original project schedule, within budget, and 
meeting the functionality requirements originally specified. 
Departmental Directives 
Program 
Used to establish Directives as the primary means to set, communicate, 
and institutionalize policies, requirements, responsibilities, and 
procedures for Departmental Elements and contractors. Equivalencies 
and exemptions to this Order are processed in accordance with DOE 
Order 251.1C, Departmental Directives Program. 
Development, 
Modernization, and 
Enhancement (DME) 
DME means the project cost for new projects, changes, or modifications 
to existing systems to improve capability or performance; changes 
mandated by Congress or Agency leadership; personnel costs for 
investment management; and direct support. For major IT investments, 
this amount should equal the sum of amounts reported for planning and 
acquisition plus the associated Full Time Employee (FTE) costs 
reported in the OMB Exhibit 300B. 
DOE Elements  Headquarters Elements or first-tier Organizations as listed in the 
Correspondence Style Guide, Office of the Executive Secretariat.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 4 
12-3-2012 Page 3 
 
 
Term Definition 
Enterprise Architecture (EA) A business-driven plan that describes the current state, future vision, 
and transitional states of an operation. This is presented in terms of: 
strategy and performance, business, applications and services, 
technology, data, and security, all at the end of a 2-to-5 year planning 
horizon. 
Enterprise-wide IT Projects A project that spans or impacts multiple DOE Elements. 
Equivalencies That which has the same or almost the same characteristics or effect. 
Information Management 
Governance Board (IMGB) 
The DOE Information Management Governance Board (IMGB) serves 
as a forum for collaboration, development, coordination, and execution 
of efforts relating to DOE enterprise cyber activities and issues. 
Information  Any communication or representation of knowledge such as facts, data, 
or opinions in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, 
cartographic, narrative, or audiovisual forms. 
Information System A combination of information, computer, and telecommunications 
resources; other information technology resources; and personnel 
resources that collect, record, process, store, communicate, retrieve, and 
display information. 
Information Technology (IT) Information technology, as defined by the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 
sections 5002, 5141, and 5142, means any equipment or interconnected 
system or subsystem of equipment that is used in the automatic 
acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, movement, control, 
display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or 
information. For purposes of this definition, equipment is “used” by an 
Agency whether the Agency uses the equipment directly or it is used by a 
contractor under a contract with the Agency that (1) requires the use of 
such equipment or (2) requires the use, to a significant extent, of such 
equipment in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. 
Information technology includes computers, ancillary equipment, 
software, firmware, and similar procedures, services (including support 
services), and related resources. It does not include any equipment that is 
acquired by a Federal contractor incidental to a Federal contract. 
Information technology is any proposed acquisition of information 
technology or information technology-related resources to support a 
defined business need. 
Initiative An initiative is created by an Organization in response to a driver or 
internal Directives and defines the scope of the Organizational 
work- efforts performed.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 4 DOE O 415.1 
Page 4 12-3-2012 
 
Term Definition 
Internal Controls  A process affected by an Organization's structure, work and authority 
flows, and people and management information systems; it is designed to 
help the Organization accomplish specific goals or objectives. It is a means 
by which an Organization's resources are directed, monitored, and 
measured. 
IT Assets  These IT assets provide the infrastructure and operational IT services 
necessary for accomplishing the site Missions and Programs. Specifically, 
they are locally managed IT assets or IT support services. Examples 
include the following: 
• Networks; 
• Telecommunications; 
• End-user devices (Desktops, Laptops, Printers, Tablets, mobile 
devices, etc); 
• Internet/Intranet; 
• Email; 
• Collaboration Tools; 
• IT Planning (EA/CPIC/Program Office Support); 
• Web Hosting; 
• Data Storage; and/or 
• Contractor Business/Financial/Administrative Systems. 
IT Investment For the purpose of this Order, an IT investment is used interchangeably 
with an IT asset and IT project. 
IT Project  A planned endeavor funded by an approved information technology 
investment, thus achieving a specific goal and creating a unique 
product, service, or result. A project has a defined start and end point 
with specific objectives that, when attained, signify completion. 
IT Project Management 
Office (IT PMO) 
An Organizational Element or group that defines and maintains the 
standards or processes generally related to Project Management within the 
Organization. The PMO develops project guidance, policies, and 
procedures. 
IT Project Manager (IT PM) An individual in the Headquarters (HQ) Organizational Element 
responsible for managing a project and its assigned activities. This 
individual ensures that all the projects are properly phased, funded over 
time, and that each Project Manager is meeting his/her key milestones. 
These individuals are the project’s advocates, ensure proper resourcing, 
and facilitate the execution process. They predict Programmatic risks and 
put mitigation strategies in place so that projects are not affected.

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 4 
12-3-2012 Page 5 
 
 
Term Definition 
Life Cycle Management 
(LCM) 
A business approach to manage the total life cycle of products and 
services. LCM is used to understand and analyze life cycle stages of 
products and services of a business; identify potential economic, social, 
or environmental risks and opportunities at each stage; and create ways 
to act upon those opportunities and reduce potential risks. 
Maintenance An activity necessary to keep an asset functioning as designed during its 
operations and maintenance phase of a project. Maintenance costs 
include costs needed to sustain an IT asset at the current capability and 
performance levels including: corrective hardware/software, voice and 
data communications maintenance, replacement of damaged or obsolete 
IT equipment, and associated overhead costs. Examples of maintenance 
projects include operating system upgrades, technology refreshes, and 
security patch implementations. 
Milestone  Any significant or substantive point, time, or event of the project. 
Milestones typically refer to points at which large-schedule events or 
series of events have been completed, and a new phase(s) is set to begin. 
Modular Development  Focuses on a project or activity of the overall vision and progressively 
expands upon the agencies’ capabilities, until the overall vision is realized. 
Modular Development projects are broken down into discrete projects or 
increments, each of which are undertaken to develop and implement the 
products and capabilities that the larger program must deliver 
Objective  This defines the principal areas of concern within the overall goal; it may 
also provide quantitative measures of future performance and may list 
several Strategic Targets that provide additional quantification of Agency 
objectives. 
Office of the Chief 
Information Officer (OCIO) 
The Office responsible to ensure that IT is acquired and information 
resources are managed consistent with statutory, regulatory, and 
Departmental requirements and priorities. 
Operation The day-to-day management of an asset in the production environment 
and included activities to operate data centers, help desks, operational 
centers, telecommunication centers, and end user support services. 
Operational activities are reported through Section C of the Exhibit 
300B. Operations costs include the expenses associated with an IT asset 
that is in the production environment to sustain an IT asset at the current 
capability and performance levels including Federal and contracted 
labor costs and the costs for the disposal of an asset. 
Process A permanent or semi-permanent collection of measurable, auditable, and 
repeatable activities that result in an output.

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 4 DOE O 415.1 
Page 6 12-3-2012 
 
Term Definition 
Project A project has a defined start and end point with specific objectives that, 
when attained, signify completion thus achieving a specific goal and 
creating a unique product, service, or result. Built on interdependent 
activities planned to meet a common objective, a project focuses on 
attaining or completing a deliverable within a predetermined cost, 
schedule, and technical scope. 
Project Management  Project Management is the discipline of planning, organizing, securing, 
managing, leading, and controlling resources to achieve specific goals. A 
project is a temporary endeavor with a defined beginning and end (usually 
time-constrained, and often constrained by funding or deliverables) 
undertaken to meet unique goals and objectives, typically to bring about 
beneficial change or added value. 
Project Management Plan 
(PMP) 
The contractor-prepared document that sets forth the plans, organization, 
and systems that the contractor will utilize to manage the project. Its 
content and the extent of detail of the PMP will vary in accordance with 
the size of the type of project and state of project execution. 
Project Performance  The overall measurement of whether a project has met objectives and 
requirements of scope, cost, and schedule. A periodic measurement during 
the monitoring and controlling phases of a project performed to observe 
project execution and identify variances from the Project Management 
Plan for proactive mitigation. 
Quality Assurance Program 
(QAP) 
In Project Management, an inspection of the accomplished work to ensure 
its alignment with the project scope. In practice, projects typically have a 
dedicated quality control team, which focuses on this area. 
Requirements  A singular documented need of what a particular product or service 
should be or perform. It is a statement that identifies a necessary 
attribute, capability, characteristic, or quality of a system in order for it 
to have value and utility to a user. Business requirements describe in 
business terms what must be delivered or accomplished to provide 
value. Functional requirements describe the functionality that the 
system is to execute. 
Risk Factor, element, constraint, or course of action that introduces an 
uncertainty of outcome either positively or negatively that could impact 
project objectives.

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 415.1 Attachment 4 
12-3-2012 Page 7 
 
 
Term Definition 
Risk Management  The handling of risks through specific methods and techniques. 
Effective risk management is an essential element of every project. The 
DOE risk management concept is based on the principles that risk 
management must be analytical, forward-looking, structured, 
informative, and continuous. Risk assessments should be performed as 
early as possible in the project and should identify critical technical, 
performance, schedule, and cost risks. Once risks are identified, sound 
risk mitigation strategies and actions should be developed and 
documented. 
Solution A comprehensive architectural response to a business problem. 
Solutions address all layers of EA - strategy, business, data, 
applications, and technology/security. 
Sponsoring/Funding 
Organization 
The DOE Organization responsible for providing the necessary funding 
to support the project and project activities. 
Stakeholder  Individuals and Organizations that are actively involved in the project, 
or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected as a result of 
Program execution or completion. They may also exert influence over 
the Program and its results. 
Steady State (SS)  Steady State means maintenance and operation costs at current 
capability and performance levels including costs for personnel, 
maintenance of existing information systems, corrective software 
maintenance, voice and data communications maintenance, and 
replacement of broken IT equipment. For major IT projects, this amount 
should equal the amount reported for maintenance plus the associated 
FTE costs reported in the OMB Exhibit 300B. 
System An interconnected set of information resources organized for the 
collection, processing, maintenance, transmission, and dissemination of 
information, in accordance with defined procedures, whether automated 
or manual. 
Tailoring Tailoring is used to determine which processes and outputs are 
appropriate, and the degree of rigor that should be applied based on 
factors such as scope, size, risk, and complexity. 
Total Cost of Ownership 
(TCO) 
An analysis used to gauge the viability of any project. An Enterprise 
may use it as a product/process comparison tool. The TCO directly 
relates to an Enterprise's assets and/or related systems total costs across 
all projects and processes, thus giving a picture of the profitability over 
time.

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 4 DOE O 415.1 
Page 8 12-3-2012 
 
Term Definition 
Total Project Cost (TPC)  All cost planning and implementation specific to a project incurred 
through the startup of continual operations (capability delivered) but 
prior to the operation of the facility. 
Value Measuring 
Methodology (VMM)  
A tool that helps balance both tangible and intangible values when 
making project decisions, and monitoring benefits.
