--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT:  INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov  Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security 
 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
Washington, DC 
 
 Approved: 12-18-2024 
SUBJECT: SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS 
1. P URPOSE . Establish the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Safeguards and Security 
(S&S) Program Management Operations requirements as promulgated in laws, 
regulations, Executive Orders (EO), and national standards established to prevent adverse 
impacts on national security and mitigate unacceptable risks.  This Order addresses 
facility clearance (FCL) (also known as entity eligibility determinations) requirements; 
foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) determinations; classified mail channels; 
classified visits within the Department, including foreign classified visits; and incidents 
of security concern (IOSC). 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES. 
a. This Order hereby cancels the portions of DOE Order (O) 470.4B Chg 3 
(LtdChg), Safeguards and Security Program, that relate to S&S Program 
Management Operations. DOE O 470.4C, Safeguards and Security Planning, 
cancels the S&S Planning portions of DOE O 470.4B Chg 3. 
b. Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise affect any 
contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive. Contractor 
Requirements Documents (CRDs [Attachment 1]) that have been incorporated 
into a contract remain in effect throughout the term of the contract unless and 
until the contract or regulatory commitment is modified to either eliminate 
requirements that are no longer applicable or substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability. Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 
3.c., this Order applies to all cleared Departmental elements.  The Administrator 
of the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) must ensure that NNSA 
employees and contractors comply with their responsibilities under this directive. 
Nothing in this directive will be construed to interfere with the NNSA 
Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of Public Law (P.L.) 106-65 to 
establish Administration specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary.   
2. DOE Contractors. Attachment 1 sets forth the requirements of this Order that will apply 
to contracts that include the CRD or its requirements.
DOE O 470.1A

--- page 2 ---
2  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
 
 
The CRD and its requirements must be included in all contracts (primary and 
subcontracts) that involve security activities1, require access to national security 
assets, and/or contain DOE Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) clause 952.204-2, 
Security Requirements. 
a. Contractors are responsible for incorporating the CRD and its requirements into 
their affected subcontracts.  
3. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 470.1. Equivalencies and exemptions from the 
requirements of this Order are processed in accordance with the current DOE O 251.1, 
Departmental Directives Program, current version. 
a. Requests must be based on an informed risk management decision. 
b. When applicable, the requesting organization must document and accept the 
security risk in accordance with applicable authorities. 
c. The requesting organization must consult with their relevant General Counsel 
(GC) and the Office of Environment, Health, Safety, and Security (EHSS), Office 
of Security (EHSS-50) before submitting the request for approval.  The Office of 
Security must respond to consultation request within 45 days from receipt of the 
request.   
d. Approved equivalencies and exemptions must be entered into the Safeguards and 
Security Information Management System (SSIMS) database and incorporated 
into the approved security plan(s) to be effective for operations. 
e. DOE S&S program requirements may also be located in, or based upon, 
regulations issued by Federal agencies, and codified in the Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFRs), or other authorities, such as Executive Orders (EO) or 
Presidential Directives. In such cases, the process for deviating from those 
requirements found in the source document must be applied. If the source 
document does not include a deviation process, DOE GC, or NNSA GC, must be 
consulted to determine whether the Departmental Element’s deviation from the 
source can be legally pursued. 
f. Existing equivalencies and exemptions must be reviewed to determine relevancy 
and applicability to the requirements set forth in this Order.  
(1) Existing equivalencies and exemptions must be reviewed to determine 
applicability under DOE O 470.1, current version. If applicable, the site 
must document the review was completed and the equivalency or 
exemption remains valid.  
(2) Equivalency. In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
 
1 "Safeguards and Security Activity" is also known as security activity. The terms "safeguards and security activity" 
and "security activities" are used interchangeably throughout this Order. See Attachment 7 for Definitions.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 470.1A  3 
12-18-2024 
 
assigned by EO 12344, codified at 50 USC sections 2406 and 2511 and to 
ensure consistency throughout the joint Navy, DOE Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Program, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors 
(Director) will implement and oversee requirements and practices 
pertaining to this Directive for activities under the Director's cognizance, 
as deemed appropriate. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. General. 
(1) Departmental Elements must ensure S&S programs implement the 
requirements found in the Attachments to this Order and all supportive 
contracts that include this CRD, or its requirements as specified by the 
contracting officer. 
(2) Whenever a legal, regulatory, or other external standard, or a DOE 
directive referenced within this Order is amended or superseded, the 
current version is applicable under this Order. 
(3) S&S programs must implement and maintain S&S operations management 
roles, responsibilities, and requirements contained in this Directive. 
(4) Programs associated with each topical area within this Order must be 
implemented in accordance with the requirements for that topic. 
(5) S&S program management operations and implementation procedures 
must be documented in the approved security plan in accordance with 
DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Planning, current version. 
(6) Incidents of security concern must be addressed in accordance with the 
requirements found in Attachment 6 and reported in accordance with 
applicable laws and regulations. 
(7) S&S program management operations must be thoroughly integrated with 
other Departmental programs to coordinate related security activities 
addressed in this Order, including Safety, Emergency Management, 
Personnel Security, Insider Threat, Contracts and Procurements, 
Counterintelligence, FCL and FOCI program, GC (as appropriate), and 
Federal oversight organizations.2 
b. Delegation of S&S Authorities.  
(1) Delegation of authority to Officially Designated Federal Security 
 
2 See paragraph 4., "Responsibilities," "Office of General Counsel (GC)".

--- page 4 ---
4  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
Authority (ODFSA) or Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA) 
is implemented according to direction from the accountable Program 
Secretarial Officer (or the Secretary or Deputy Secretary for Departmental 
Elements not organized under a Program Secretarial Officer) who also 
provides direction for further delegation beyond the primary delegation.  
(2) Each delegation must be formally documented. It may be included in other 
security plans or documentation approved by or according to direction 
from the office which is delegating authority. 
(3) Each delegator remains responsible for the delegate’s acts or omissions in 
carrying out the purpose of the delegation. 
c. Implementation. 
(1) After being notified by the Head of the Departmental Element or designee, 
the Contracting Officer (CO) must incorporate the Contractor 
Requirements Document (CRD) in Attachment 1 in existing applicable 
contracts per the process described in DOE O 251.1, Departmental 
Directives Program, current version. 
(2) Compliance with the requirements within this Order, including the 
Attachments, must be complete within one (1) year of the issuance date. 
(3) If compliance cannot be accomplished within one (1) year, an 
implementation schedule must be submitted to the appropriate Cognizant 
Security Office (CSO), prior to this deadline. 
(4) The documentation must include timelines and resources needed to fully 
implement this Order as well as a description of the vulnerabilities and 
impacts created by the delay. 
(5) Implementation plans must be referenced in the security plan. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Secretary of Energy. 
(1) Ensures that effective S&S program management operations are 
established, executed, and maintained within DOE under the authorities 
granted by relevant Executive Orders; the U.S. Department of Energy 
Organization Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sections 7101 to 7352); and 
Atomic Energy Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sections 2011 to 2286), and in 
accordance with P.L. 106-65, the National Nuclear Security 
Administration Act. 
(2) Designates senior Departmental officials to direct S&S program operations 
management procedures.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 470.1A  5 
12-18-2024 
 
(3) Delegates, in writing, all responsibilities and authorities as necessary for 
the administration of the S&S program operations. 
(4) Exercises sole authority to approve the imposition of requirements for 
programs and activities that are more stringent and/or comprehensive than 
those imposed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
b. Deputy Secretary. 
(1) Exercises responsibility, as Chief Operating Officer of the Department, for 
S&S policy development and operations. 
(2) Approves all S&S Directives. 
(3) In accordance with 50 U.S.C. Section 2656, ensures that the Committees 
on Armed Services of the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. 
Senate are notified of each significant nuclear defense intelligence loss. 
c. Under Secretary for Nuclear Security/Administrator for the National Nuclear 
Security Administration. 
(1) Responsible for the management and implementation of S&S programs 
administered by NNSA and its subordinate offices, including provision of 
the appropriate level of authorities and resources to effectively manage 
and execute S&S responsibilities. 
(2) Responsible for the development and implementation of security 
programs, operations, and facilities under the purview of NNSA. 
(3) Through the Deputy Administrator for Defense Programs: 
(a) Ensures that all classified visits in connection with the military 
application of atomic energy under 42 U.S.C. Section 2164 and 42 
U.S.C. Section 2121 are conducted in accordance with National 
and Departmental policies and governing international agreements 
or treaties.  
(b) Approves requests for access to weapons programs and classified 
information pertaining to Nuclear Weapons Data (NWD). 
(4) Through the Deputy Administrator for Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation,  
Ensures that all classified visits in connection with nonproliferation, 
international security, or International Atomic Energy Agency 
requirements are conducted in accordance with National and Departmental 
policies and governing international agreements or treaties. 
(5) Through the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors:

--- page 6 ---
6  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
(a) Ensures that all classified visits in connection with naval nuclear 
propulsion are conducted in accordance with National and 
Departmental policies and governing international agreements or 
treaties. 
(b) Approves requests for classified visits and access to naval nuclear 
propulsion facilities.  
(6) Through the Associate Administrator and Chief for Defense Nuclear 
Security: 
(a) Responsible for the development and implementation of security 
programs for the Administration, including the protection, control 
and accounting of materials, and for the physical security for all 
facilities of the NNSA. 
(b) Acts as Senior NNSA official responsible for the direction and 
administration of the NNSA implementation and compliance with 
the National Industrial Security Program.  
(c) Acts as the Senior NNSA official responsible for classified visits 
except for those assigned to the Deputy Administrator for Defense 
Programs; delegates in writing to a senior Federal official at each 
NNSA site the authority to take a risk-based approach to oversee 
the classified visits program for granting access to RD. 
(d) Implements DOE’s North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
program for DOE and NNSA including access authorizations, 
policy, operations of the DOE Sub-Registry, and the conduct of 
DOE domestic inspections. 
d. Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security (EHSS). 
(1) Develops, coordinates and promulgates the Department’s S&S policies 
and procedures to ensure a comprehensive S&S Program consistent with 
the Department’s statutory authorities, mission, and national-level 
policies. 
(2) Oversees DOE Headquarters CSOs and delegates this authority in writing as 
appropriate. 
(3) Oversees implementation of DOE Headquarters S&S program operations, 
including the development of S&S program management operations 
implementation procedures and guidance. 
(4) Serves as the Approval Authority of Headquarters equivalencies and 
exemptions.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 470.1A  7 
12-18-2024 
 
(5) Provides S&S program management operations implementation guidance 
and assistance for DOE offices located in Headquarters facilities. 
(6) Provides S&S program management operations advice and assistance to 
Departmental organizations. 
(7) Maintains national-level liaison with Federal and local law enforcement, 
security, and intelligence agencies to support DOE’s S&S program 
management operations. 
(8) Represents DOE in interagency efforts related to S&S activities. 
(9) Acts as the Senior Agency Official responsible for direction and 
implementation of DOE’s implementation of and compliance with the 
NISP. 
(10) Annually report NISP-related costs and implementation metrics to the 
Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO). 
e. Program Secretarial Officer. 
(1) Ensures S&S programs are effectively and efficiently managed and 
implemented throughout the organization. 
(2) Designates the CSO under their purview in addition to those designated 
per 32 CFR 117. 
(3) Provides guidance and oversight to CSOs under their purview that oversee 
programs utilizing Departmental assets for the purposes of protecting S&S 
interests. 
(4) Records and reports required NISP-related costs and implementation 
metrics to EHSS per 32 CFR 2004. 
(5) Ensures that all classified visits are conducted in accordance with National 
and Departmental policies and governing international agreements or 
treaties. 
f. Cognizant Security Offices.3 CSOs are designated by the Program Secretarial 
Officer or, for NNSA, the Office of the Administrator through the Associate 
Administrator and Chief for Defense Nuclear Security. 
(1) CSOs administer and oversee assigned S&S program management 
operations activities for their sites and facilities on behalf of the Program 
Secretarial Officer. 
(2) CSO responsibilities for each topical area are conveyed within the 
 
3 As defined in Attachment 7

--- page 8 ---
8  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
Attachments of this Order.  
(3) Industrial Security Service Provider render facility clearances, FOCI 
determinations, and/or other industrial security-related services on behalf 
of the CSO. 
g. Heads of Field Elements and Headquarters Departmental Elements. 
(1) Oversee the development of S&S plans that describe S&S program 
management operations implementation procedures. 
(2) Develop and/or allocate budgets and resources to maintain effective S&S 
program management operations. 
(3) Provide S&S program management operations supplemental guidance and 
directs implementation procedures. 
(4) Ensure that line management implements the applicable provisions of 
programs described in this Order.  
(5) Communicate to contracting officers the security requirements for 
contracts that require the performance of security activities and/or access 
to security assets.  
(6) Ensure that contracting officers provide DOE F 470.1, Contract Security 
Classification Specification (CSCS), to the CSO and/or its designee. 
(7) Consult with the Office of Security prior to modifying or withholding any 
requirements in this Order from a contract. 
(8) Ensure that contractors and subcontractors under their cognizance 
implement the provisions of the CRD and attachments to this Order when 
the CRD is incorporated in their contracts. 
h. Officially Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA). 
(1) Executes requirements and responsibilities that are formally delegated 
from DOE or NNSA 
(2) Reviews and approves contractor security plans, establishing a Federally 
approved authorization for site security operations. 
(3)  Accepts or transmits the security risk associated with the assets under 
their cognizance, in accordance with DOE O 470.3, current version. 
(4) Performs S&S program management operations activities as prescribed in 
this Order.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 470.1A  9 
12-18-2024 
 
(5) Ensure that a senior Federal official at each site under their cognizance has 
been delegated in writing the authority to make, in connection with 
classified visits, an affirmative determination that permitting a U.S. citizen 
holding a clearance granted by another Federal agency to have access to 
Restricted Data (RD) will not endanger the common defense and security 
prior to granting such access in connection with a specific classified visit. 
i. Officially Designated Security Authority (ODSA). 
(1) Executes requirements and responsibilities that are formally delegated 
from DOE or NNSA. 
(2) Performs delegated S&S program management operations activities 
prescribes within the Attachments of this Order. 
j. Office of Enterprise Assessments. 
(1) Performs assessments and reports to the Secretary on the Department’s 
S&S programs. 
(2) Implements the procedures for the assessment of civil penalties set forth in 
10 CFR Part 824, Procedural Rules for the Assessment of Civil Penalties 
for Classified Information Security Violations. 
(3) Develops and provides S&S program management operations training 
programs through the National Training Center (NTC). 
(4) Through the NTC, certifies site implementation of NTC-developed 
courses, establishes the Training Approval Program for S&S programs, 
and approves site training programs. 
k. Contracting Officers. 
(1) Upon notification of applicability, incorporate the CRD into affected 
contracts via the appropriate process. 
(2) Assist Government Contracting Activities (GCAs) with developing 
contract solicitations to incorporate the requirements of this Order. 
(3) Contracting Officers must consult with the Head of Departmental or Field 
Element to propose any modification or withholding of any requirements 
in this Order from a contract. 
(4) Provide written notification to the CSO in accordance with Attachment 3, 
"Foreign Ownership, Control, or Influence", of this Order when 
contractual changes impacting a company’s foreign ownership, control, or 
influence occur.

--- page 10 ---
10  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
(5) DOE Contracting Officers and the Primary contractor must ensure the 
CRD, applicable security requirements, and DEAR clauses are 
incorporated into the tiered subcontracts under their cognizance. 
(6) Maintain cognizance of subcontracts with performance of security 
activities and/or access to security assets for contract performance. 
(7) Reviews procurement requests for new contracts and ensures that the 
provisions of 48 CFR Section 952.204-2, Security Requirements, and the 
requirements of the CRD and its attachments in this Order are included in 
the contracts when required. 
l. Office of the General Counsel (GC).4. 
(1) Provides legal advice and assistance regarding issues or changes in laws 
and regulations that affect S&S programs and interests. 
(2) Provides legal advice on S&S program management operations 
requirements prescribed in this Order. 
(3) Reviews and provides legal advice and assistance regarding foreign 
ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) mitigation strategies and National 
Interest Determinations (NIDs). 
m. Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence. 
(1) Shares relevant information developed through 
intelligence/counterintelligence program activities with appropriate 
offices. 
(2) Interfaces and interacts with S&S programs to ensure Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) requirements are identified, defined, 
and maintained, when applicable. 
(3) Notifies the ODFSA, or designee, of security incidents during 
intelligence/counterintelligence activities. This notification will be upon 
discovery unless such notification would severely impede or negate 
intelligence activities or counterintelligence investigations, or further 
compromise classified/sensitive information. 
(4) Ensures that all classified visits in connection with SCI are conducted in 
accordance with governing National and Departmental policies and 
international agreements or treaties. 
 
4 For the purposes of this Directive, the "Office of General Counsel" or "General Counsel" represents the DOE 
Office of the General Counsel (DOE GC), and NNSA Office of General Counsel (NA-GC), unless otherwise 
specifically stated.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 470.1A  11 
12-18-2024 
 
(5) Ensures that information on relevant intelligence/counterintelligence 
concerns is provided to Departmental elements responsible for classified 
visits by foreign nationals under international agreements and treaties and 
to individuals responsible for hosting classified visits by foreign nationals 
to DOE facilities and sites. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS.5  
a. This Order does not invoke any DOE technical standards or industry standards as 
required methods. 
b. Any technical standard or industry standard that is mentioned in or referenced by 
this Order is not invoked by this Order. 
7. DEFINITIONS. 
a. Terms commonly used in the DOE Safeguards and Security Program are defined 
within Attachment 7 of this Order, and in the DOE Policy Information Resource 
(PIR) tool located at https://pir.doe.gov/. 
b. Terms specific to an Attachment are defined within that Attachment. 
8. REFERENCES. 
a. Attachment 8 contains the list of referenced documents within this Directive. 
b. DOE Orders referenced in this Order are located on the DOE Directives webpage, 
https://www.directives.doe.gov/. 
c. DOE Technical Standards referenced in this Order are located on the DOE 
Technical Standards webpage, https://www.standards.doe.gov/. 
d. All other referenced materials are located on the DOE PIR tool, 
https://pir.doe.gov/. 
9. CONTACT. 
a. Questions concerning this Order should be directed to the Office of Security 
Policy, Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security, email address 
Security.Directives@hq.doe.gov. 
b. Formal policy clarification requests must be submitted to the Director, Office of 
Security through the respective Program Office. 
c. Questions regarding implementation requirements and procedures should be 
directed through to the requestor’s respective line management channels. 
 
5 DOE O 251.1, current version, defines "invoked technical standard."

--- page 12 ---
12  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
DAVID M. TURK 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 470.1A  i 
12-18-2024 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SUBJECT: SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS ...1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................................................................................. i 
ATTACHMENT 1 CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (CRD) DOE O 470.1A, 
SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS ................. 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 2  FACILITY CLEARANCES (FCL)AND REGISTRATION OF 
SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY ACTIVITIES ...................................................................... 2-1 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 1:  FCL PROGRAM ................................................................... 2-3 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 2:  FCL CODES .......................................................................... 2-5 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 3:  FCL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS ................................ 2-10 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 4:  FCL RECIPROCITY ........................................................... 2-12 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 5:  DOCUMENTATION AND REGISTRATION OF FCL .... 2-16 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 6: INTERIM AND LIMITED FCLS ........................................ 2-21 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 7: FACILITY CLEAREANCE SUSPENSIONS ...................... 2-23 
ATTACHMENT 2 SECTION 8: SECURITY ACTIVITY/FCL TERMINATION .................. 2-26 
ATTACHMENT 3 FOREIGN OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, OR INFLUENCE PROGRAM .... 3-1 
ATTACHMENT 3  SECTION 1: FOCI PROGRAM PROCESSING ........................................ 3-7 
ATTACHMENT 3 SECTION 2: FOCI REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ................................ 3-9 
ATTACHMENT 3 SECTION 2, CHAPTER 1:  CHANGES TO FOCI INFORMATION ..... 3-14 
ATTACHMENT 3  SECTION 3: PERSONNEL SECURITY CLEARANCES AND 
EXCLUSION PROCEDURES .................................................................................................. 3-17 
ATTACHMENT 3 SECTION 4: FOCI MITIGATION ............................................................ 3-19 
ATTACHMENT 4 CLASSIFIED MAIL CHANNELS .............................................................. 4-1 
ATTACHMENT 5 CONTROL OF CLASSIFIED VISITS ........................................................ 5-1 
ATTACHMENT 6 INCIDENTS OF SECURITY CONCERN .................................................. 6-1 
ATTACHMENT 6  SECTION 1:  INCIDENTS OF SECURITY CONCERN REQUIREMENTS
.................................................................................................................................................... 6-19

--- page 14 ---
ii  DOE O 470.1A 
  12-18-2024 
  
 
ATTACHMENT 7 S&S PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS DEFINITIONS ......... 7-1 
ATTACHMENT 8 S&S PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS REFERENCES ........ 8-1

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
12-18-2024  Page 1-1 (and Page 1-2) 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (CRD) 
DOE O 470.1A, SAFEGUARDS AND SECURITY PROGRAM 
MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS 
This CRD establishes the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) requirements for conducting 
management activities connected with the operation of cleared facilities within the DOE 
complex. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this CRD, contractors are responsible for 
complying with Attachments 2 - 8 to DOE O 470.1, current version. Each Attachment 
provides program requirements and/or information that is applicable to contracts in which 
this CRD and/or DEAR Clause 952.204-2 is inserted or must be applied. 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with 
the requirements of this CRD. The contractor is responsible for flowing down the 
requirements of this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the 
contractor’s compliance with the requirements. 
A violation of the provisions of the CRD and/or contract security requirements to protect 
and safeguard national security assets may result in a civil penalty pursuant to the Atomic 
Energy Act (42 U.S.C. Section 2282b), Section 234B Subsection A. The procedures for the 
assessment of civil penalties are set forth in 10 CFR Part 824, Procedural Rules for the 
Assessment of Civil Penalties for Classified Information Security Violations.

--- page 16 ---


--- page 17 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2  
FACILITY CLEARANCES (FCL)AND REGISTRATION OF SAFEGUARDS AND 
SECURITY ACTIVITIES 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A 
and information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. OBJECTIVE. To ensure that DOE, DOE contractor, and other (Federal) government 
agency (OGA) facilities and their contractors engaged in DOE activities are eligible for 
access to, and meet the requirements to possess and secure, classified information or 
matter or special nuclear material (SNM)/other accountable nuclear material (OANM); 
and, as applicable, to protect other assets and conduct other security activities on behalf 
of DOE. 
2. P URPOSE . The FCL program regulates DOE approval of a Federal or contractor 
facility’s eligibility to access, receive, generate, reproduce, store, transmit, or destroy 
classified information or matter; SNM/OANM; other hazardous material presenting a 
potential radiological, chemical, or biological sabotage threat; and/or DOE property of 
significant monetary value, exclusive of facilities and land values (hereinafter referred to 
as security assets and activities). 
3. GE NERAL . 
a. This Attachment establishes the requirements that ensure DOE, DOE contractor 
entities, and Cognizant Security Agency (CSA) facilities and their contractor 
entities that are engaged in DOE security activities are eligible for access to and 
meet the requirements to access, possess, and secure security assets on behalf of 
DOE. 
b. The Department of Energy Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) Subpart 904.70, 
"Facility Clearance" and Subpart 952.204-73, "Facility Clearance" are 
incorporated into contracts for the protection security activities and assets.   
c. The 32 CFR 117, National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual 
(NISPOM), current version, serves as a national standard to establish the baseline 
requirements for contractor FCLs when contractors are engaged in security 
activities requiring the protection of national security information classified at the 
Confidential, Secret, or Top Secret (TS) level. 
4. REQUIREMENTS. An entity (federal or contractor) must ensure that the following 
activities are accomplished for their FCL program and by entities under their cognizance. 
a. Establish and maintain FCL activities in accordance with the requirements 
contained in this Order. 
b. Provide required information to the Cognizant Security Officer (CSO) and/or the

--- page 18 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-2  12-18-2024 
  
 
Industrial Security Service Provider (ISSP)6 to ascertain risk and if classified 
information and other security assets are adequately protected to make an FCL 
determination. 
c. Ensure the DOE F 470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record (FDAR), DOE F 
470.1, Contract Security Classification Specification (CSCS) and other 
information pertaining to FCLs are accurately entered and maintained in the 
Safeguards and Security Information Management System (SSIMS). 
d. CSOs must ensure that key management personnel (KMP) that must be cleared in 
connection with the FCL, possess and maintain DOE personnel security 
clearances (PCLs) at or higher than the FCL that is required for contract 
performance. 
e. CSOs must ensure that entities have an active DOE FCL prior to engaging in 
security activities and/or accessing or possessing security assets. 
f. Changes that affect a cleared entity must be reported to the CSO and any other 
DOE federal authorities. 
g. Establish internal procedures to ensure that cleared employees are aware of their 
responsibilities for reporting pertinent information to the Facility Security Officer 
(FSO), appropriate DOE authorities (including Counterintelligence), the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, or other Federal authorities as required by DOE 
directives, the terms of the classified contract, and U.S. law.7 
h. Cooperate with DOE and other federal authorities during the FOCI/FCL process, 
official surveys and investigations concerning the protection of classified 
information and DOE security interests, and during access authorization 
investigations. 
i. Maintain all records pertaining to the FCL, including original records in 
accordance with National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) records 
retention schedule. 
j. Document FCL program procedures in the approved security plans. 
 
6 For the purposes of this Attachment, CSO and ISSP may be interchangeable to identify FCL responsibilities. 
 
7 The term "Classified Contract" refers to any procurement vehicle that involves security activities and/or access to   
security assets, that requires an FCL and personnel security clearances (PCL) also called access authorizations).

--- page 19 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-3 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 1:  FCL PROGRAM 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A 
and information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL. 
a. DOE federal facilities: 
(1) That possess security assets require an FCL and must be registered as 
Possessing with a Facility Code. 
(2) Whose employees require PCLs must have a commensurate FCL with a 
Facility Code. 
b. Government-Owned, Contractor-Operated (GOCO) facilities with security assets 
and/or security activities require an FCL and must be registered as Possessing or 
Non- possessing with a Facility Code. 
c. Management and Operating (M&O) contractors awarded the contract for the 
GOCO must:  
(1) Have a separate FCL from the GOCO.  
(2) The GOCO, DOE Form 470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record (FDAR), 
will reflect the Possessing or Non-Possessing approvals for the GOCO 
facility.  
(3) The M&O contractor must have a separate FCL approval at the same or 
higher classification level/category for access only. 
d. State, local, tribal, and other similar governmental authorities do not have 
authority to self-certify clearances to engage in security activities. These entities 
must be handled in accordance with E.O. 13549, Classified National Security 
Information Program for State, Local, Tribal, and Private Sector Entities, and its 
implementing directives. 
e. Entities at any tier will require an FCL when the terms of the contract awarded 
include access to security assets and/or engagement in security activities and 
described as a "possessing" or "non-possessing" facility. 
f. An entity at any tier requiring an FCL must be sponsored by: 
(1) A Government Contracting Activity (GCA).

--- page 20 ---
Attachment 2, Section 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-4  12-18-2024 
  
 
(2) A cleared contractor acting as the prime contractor for an uncleared 
subcontractor. 
(3) A contractor cannot sponsor itself for an FCL. 
g. Contractors whose employees require PCLs for contract performance must have 
an FCL commensurate with the assets to be protected.   
h. A contractor or prospective contractor must meet the following eligibility 
requirements prior to being processed for an FCL: 
(1) Be selected to perform tasks under a contract containing the DEAR 
security clauses found in 48 CFR Part 952; and 
(2) Be organized under the laws of one of the 50 States, the District of 
Columbia, or Puerto Rico and must be located in the United States or a 
U.S. territorial area or possession; 
(3) Have a reputation for integrity and lawful conduct in its business 
operations and relationships; 
(4) Not have been barred from participating in U.S. Government contracts 
(this includes key management on the contract); and 
(5) Not be under foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) to a degree 
that the granting or continuation of the FCL would be inconsistent with the 
national interest.

--- page 21 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-5  
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 2: FCL CODES 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL.  
a. Each federal or contractor entity that will access security assets or engage in 
security activities must be identified with a Facility Code in SSIMS.  
b. The entity’s Facility Code must be recorded on the FDAR. 
2. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Facility Code. For purposes of granting and registering a FCL in SSIMS, an entity 
(federal or contractor) and its security activities must be registered with one 
facility code when the following criteria are met: 
(1) A centrally directed security program is maintained that covers all security 
activities (i.e., under the same name, single mailing address, single 
security plan applicable at all locations, and all security matters under a 
single management control). 
(2) The physical distance between the facilities does not inhibit day-to-day 
observations of the security program by the appointed Facility Security 
Officer (FSO). 
(3) The security activities are such that the Federal or contractor entity can 
maintain daily observations and oversight of its security programs and 
operations. 
b. Entities that cannot be registered under one Facility Code as outlined above, must 
be registered with a separate Facility Code. 
c. Possessing. 
(1) A possessor is any entity that will safeguard (receive, generate, reproduce, 
store, transmit and/or destroy) classified matter, and/or SNM at the 
entity’s physical location as registered in SSIMS. 
(2) FDAR must be properly completed and identify the security assets that the 
entity is authorized to access and store. 
(a) Access – highest classification level/category of classified to be 
accessed to include any special accesses.

--- page 22 ---
Attachment 2, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-6  12-18-2024 
  
 
(b) Classified Storage Capability – highest classification 
level/category of classified approved at the entity’s facility to 
include any special accesses. 
(c) Nuclear Materials, specifically: 
1 Special Nuclear Material (SNM) – attractiveness level and 
category of SNM requiring material controls and 
accountability program. 
a H ighest category of Material Balance Area (i.e., 
Category I, II, III, or IV). 
b On site total rollup quantities (regardless of 
credibility) of SNM categories (i.e., Category I, II, 
III, or IV). 
2 O ther Accountable Nuclear M aterials (OANM) requires 
accountability program. 
(d) Additional Considerations: 
1 If the asset is considered National Critical Infrastructure as 
determined by DOE line management. 
2 I f the assets include certain categories of biological agents. 
3 If government property of a significant monetary value (e.g. 
$5M or as determined by Program Office and/or DOE Line 
Management). 
4 If th e entity has responsibilities related  to DOE program 
continuity. 
5 If th ere are national security considerations; or 
6 If the entity or assets involve responsibilities for protection 
of the health and safety of the public and employees. 
d. No n -Possessing. Any entity that will not safeguard (receive, generate, reproduce, 
store, transmit and/or destroy) classified matter, and/or SNM at the entity’s 
physical location as registered in SSIMS but will require PCLs for the employees 
to perform work at other possessing facilities.

--- page 23 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-7 
 
 
e. Self-Employed Individual. 
(1) An individual who is self-employed/a sole proprietor not doing business as 
a legal entity (i.e., paid to Social Security Number) and does not require an 
FCL, provided the individual is the sole employee requiring a PCL and is 
performing as a consultant. 
(2) An individual who will possess classified information or matter at their 
place of business must be processed for and granted an FCL. 
(a) The FCL must apply to the location where the individual will 
receive, generate, reproduce, store, transmit, and/or destroy 
classified information or matter. 
(b) Possessing self-employed individuals must implement the 
requirements set forth in this Order. 
f. Prime/Subcontractor.   
(1) A prime contract can be a possessing or non-possessing facility.  A 
prime contractor must have an FCL at the same, or higher access 
level as its subcontractors.  
(2) The subcontractor may be registered as a possessing facility while 
the prime contractor is registered as a non-possessor if the FCL level 
is the same.  
g. Multiple Facility Organization (MFOs). 
(3) The home office facility must have an FCL at the same, or higher 
access level as that of any facility (e.g., branch or division office) 
within the MFO. 
(4) The branch/division facility may be registered as a possessing 
facility while the home office is registered as a non-possessor if the 
FCL access level is the same. 
h. Parent/Subsidiary. 
(1) In a corporate tier parent-subsidiary relationship, the parent and each of its 
subsidiaries are separate legal entities and must be processed separately 
for an FCL. 
(2) CSOs must determine the necessity for the parent to be cleared or excluded 
from access.   
(3) CSOs must advise the entity on what action is necessary to process the 
FCL.

--- page 24 ---
Attachment 2, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-8  12-18-2024 
  
 
(a) Subject to DOE approval, when a parent or its cleared subsidiaries 
are co-located, a formal written agreement to use common security 
services may be executed by all firms. 
(b) The subsidiary facility may be registered as a possessing facility 
while the parent is registered as a non-possessor or excluded 
parent. 
i. Excluded Parent. A corporate tier parent of a contractor organization when the 
parent has been formally excluded through the Foreign Ownership, Control, or 
Influence (FOCI) Program from participation in the activities related to a contract 
with DOE. 
j. J oint Ventures (JVs). 
(1) A JV established as a legal business entity must be granted an FCL 
commensurate to the security activity. 
(a) Each JV partner must be granted an FCL commensurate to the 
security activity. 
(b) As determined by the CSO, JV partners that do not impact the JV’s 
operations, security activities, and/or assets may be excluded in 
accordance with the requirements set forth in this Attachment. 
(c) Cleared partners that participate in security activities must ensure 
uncleared partners are not granted access to security assets. 
(2) The JV must appoint in writing a Senior Management Official (SMO), and 
other KMP as determined by the CSO. 
(3) The JV SMO must appoint in writing, an employee, or multiple employees 
as the Insider Threat Program Senior Official (ITPSO) and FSO, that must 
obtain and maintain a DOE PCL in connection with the FCL.8 
k. Upgrading and Downgrading an FCL. 
(1) CSO must evaluate each approved facility as security activities are added 
or changed to ensure the FDAR is accurate. 
(2) CSO must determine if the changes require a transfer of the CSO based on 
the level of security assets. 
l. Transferring FCL Cognizance.

--- page 25 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024   Page 2-9 
 
 
(1) When a transfer of cognizance applies: 
(a) CSOs and/or ISSPs must notify the receiving CSO and/or ISSP of 
transfer, 
(b) The receiving CSOs and/or ISSPs must request to transfer the 
active or in process KMP PCLs within the agreed upon timeframe, 
and 
(c) A favorable FOCI determination is rendered prior to transferring 
FCL cognizance. 
(2) CSOs and/or ISSPs must update SSIMS to reflect the transfer of 
cognizance on the FDAR.

--- page 26 ---
Attachment 2, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-10  12-18-2024 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 3: FCL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A 
and information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. DOE FEDERAL FACILITIES. All eligibility requirements listed below must be satisfied 
prior to the issuance of an FCL. 
a. Must be registered in SSIMS with a Facility Code. 
b. A final FCL must be based on the following items: 
(1) Approved safeguards and security plan, developed in accordance with 
DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Planning, current version. 
(2) Completed self-assessment per DOE O 470.4, current version. 
2. CONTRACTOR FACILITIES. 
a. The DOE Acquisition Regulation (DEAR) prohibits the award of a contract 
requiring access to classified information or matter until a favorable FOCI 
determination has been rendered. 
b. The appropriate DEAR Security Clause must be applied to the contract when an 
existing unclassified contract is modified to require classified work. The classified 
work must not take place until the contract is modified and the appropriate FCL is 
issued. 
c. A contractor’s final FCL must be based on the following items: 
(1) A favorable foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) determination. 
(2) A contract or proposed contract containing the appropriate security clauses 
found in the DEAR. 
(3) Security plan approved by the Officially Designated Federal Security 
Authority, developed in accordance with DOE O 470.4, current version, 
and other directives, which describe protective measures appropriate to the 
activities being performed at the facility. 
(4) KMP, including the SMO, FSO and ITPSO, must currently possess a PCL 
equivalent to, or higher than, the FCL level.8 
 
8 An interim FCL can be granted pending the grant of the final DOE personnel security clearances.

--- page 27 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-11 
 
(5) The SMO must appoint the FSO and ITPSO, in writing.  The SMO, FSO, 
and ITPSO KMP roles can be held by the same person.  
(6) The SMO, FSO and ITPSO must be a U.S. citizen and an employee of the 
contractor entity. 
d. FSO and ITPSO training must be completed within 6 months of appointment to 
the position. 
e. In addition to the above, for Possessing facilities: 
(1) If possession of SNM and/or OANM is involved, the facility: 
(a) Must have an established Reporting Identification Symbol code for 
the Nuclear Materials Management and Safeguards System 
(NMMSS) Reporting. 
(b) Must have an appointed Nuclear Materials Representative, in 
accordance with, DOE O 474.2, Nuclear Material Control and 
Accountability, current version, who is responsible for reporting to 
NMMSS. 
(2) An initial survey: 
(a) Must be conducted no more than 6 months before the FCL is 
granted; and 
(b) Must be conducted in accordance with DOE O 470.4, current 
version.

--- page 28 ---
Attachment 2, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors  DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-12  12-18-2024 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 4: FCL RECIPROCITY 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A 
and information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL. 
a. When a contractor has an appropriate final FCL, DOE will not duplicate the final 
FCL processes performed by a CSA.9 
(1) When DOE cannot obtain acknowledgement from the CSA, the contractor 
may be subject to duplicate processing. 
(2) CSOs are not required to verify FSO training for FCLs under reciprocity. 
b. A contractor with an equal or higher FCL granted by a CSA under the NISP may 
be accepted by DOE for accessing, receiving, generating, reproducing, storing, 
transmitting, or destroying classified information or matter, or other security 
asset, contingent on the conditions listed below. 
c. Reciprocity between DOE and the CSA must be documented in a written letter or 
memorandum of agreement between the DOE cognizant security office (CSO) 
and the CSA that establishes the responsibilities of each party for assurance and 
verification of the protection afforded the DOE assets. 
2. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Accepting CSA FCLs. 
(1) Classification Level/Category and Special Conditions. The FCL granted by 
the CSA must be at the appropriate classification level and category and 
must encompass the DOE security activity. 
(a) Limited or interim FCLs granted by a CSA cannot be accepted. 
(b) DOE may not enter reciprocity with a CSA for the protection of 
SNM and/or OANM.If the CSA contractor is cleared under a FOCI 
mitigation, the CSO must obtain a copy of the FOCI mitigation 
 
9 The phrase "appropriate final FCL" or "appropriate FCL" represents the FCL (or EED), needed to access the 
classification level, caveat, and/or sensitivity level of security assets and security activities required for contract 
performance. This phrase is indicative that no outstanding or pending PCL, FCL, or FOCI determinations or actions 
remain.

--- page 29 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractor 
12-18-2024  Page 2-13 
 
plan. The mitigation plan must be submitted to EHSS or Chief for 
Defense Nuclear Security, as appropriate. 
(c) When the company is controlled by a foreign government, the 
foreign government interest must be mitigated or negated in 
accordance with Attachment 3 of this Directive. 
(d) For DOE contracts involving proscribed information (i.e., Top 
Secret, Restricted Data, COMSEC, SAP, and SCI), the following 
requirements, as appropriate, must be met before accepting an FCL 
granted in conjunction with a Special Security Agreement (SSA) 
or Security Control Agreement (SCA).   
When the company is controlled by a foreign government:  
1 DOE must have entered into an agreement with the foreign 
government involved that covers the proscribed 
information to be released under the contract; and  
2 A  waiver must be granted by the cognizant Secretary (i.e., 
the Secretary of Energy and/or the Secretary of Defense) in 
accordance with the provisions of 10 U.S.C. Section 2536, 
Award of certain contracts to entities controlled by a 
foreign government: prohibition, which prohibits contract 
awards involving proscribed information to foreign 
government-controlled companies unless such a waiver is 
granted. 
(2) A CSA Top Secret FCL can be utilized to grant a DOE Secret/RD non-
possessing or possessing interest.  
KMP for possessing (safeguarding) interests must possess DOE PCLs at 
the appropriate level.   
(3) A CSA Secret FCL can be utilized to grant a DOE Secret/RD non- 
possessing interest. All KMP and individuals requiring access to 
Secret/RD must possess DOE PCLs at the appropriate level.  
(4) If the personnel security clearances are not at the appropriate level, DOE 
will accept final FCLs granted by CSAs for access to national security 
information (NSI). Upon acceptance of the reciprocity agreement from the 
CSA, DOE will not subject the contractor to any additional processing 
when: 
(a) No proscribed information is involved, and 
(b) The FCL is commensurate with the new safeguards and security 
activity.

--- page 30 ---
Attachment 2, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors  DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-14  12-18-2024 
 
 
(5) Notification of Cancellation. An assurance must be obtained from the 
CSA that the FCL will not be canceled prior to the CSO being notified. 
(6) P rotective Measures. Written confirmation must be obtained from the 
CSA that the facility’s protective measures and procedures are adequate 
for the protection of the DOE activity, and results of the agency’s last 
survey of the facility are satisfactory in those areas that could affect the 
DOE interest. 
(7) S urveys. The facility’s survey frequency must be confirmed by the CSA. 
For possessing (safeguarding) interests, the CSO must obtain the CSA’s 
periodic survey reports or memoranda covering the survey results. 
(8) Rest ricted D ata (RD), Formerly Restricted Data, and Transclassified 
Foreign Nuclear Information (TFNI). When RD, FRD, or TFNI are 
involved, the following must be completed: 
(a) An assurance must be obtained from the CSA that the facility 
complies with the requirements of 10 CFR Part 1045, Nuclear 
Classification and Declassification. 
(b) When the DOE contract involves RD, an assurance must be 
obtained from the CSA that the facility’s protective measures and 
procedures meet the requirements of 32 CFR 117, National 
Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), 
including any additional requirements applicable to RD, or 
negotiated between CSAs. 
Must ensure that all associated DOE requirements established in 
the current versions of DOE O 471.6, Information Security, DOE 
O 452.8 Control of Nuclear Weapon Data, and/or other 
requirements established by the data owners, are met. 
(c) FCLs not meeting the requirements in (a) and (b) above may be 
accepted when the DOE activity requires that the contractor 
establish upgraded protective measures that meet DOE 
requirements. For FCL upgrades, the agreement between DOE and 
the CSA must cover reimbursement for upgrade costs incurred by 
the CSA or contractor. 
(d) When DOE accepts an FCL based on a CSA-approved Voting 
Trust Agreement, Proxy Agreement, SSA, or SCA, an assurance 
must be obtained from the CSA that it will invite and permit DOE 
to attend the annual meeting when such attendance is determined 
necessary by either the CSA or DOE.

--- page 31 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractor 
12-18-2024  Page 2-15 
 
(9) Contractor’s Tier Parent(s). 
(a) If the parent(s) of a company that DOE is processing for an FCL 
holds an FCL granted by a CSA, the tier parent(s) does not need to 
provide DOE with a FOCI package, provided reciprocity is 
accomplished with the CSA. 
(b) Reciprocity between the CSO and the CSA must be documented in 
a written agreement with the appropriate provisions as outlined 
above. 
(c) The written agreement must contain an assurance from the CSA 
that security cognizance will be transferred to DOE for any tier 
parent no longer requiring the CSA’s FCL. 
b. CSA Verification Requests. When a CSA requests verification of an existing DOE 
FCL, a copy of the facility’s current FDAR, must be provided.

--- page 32 ---
Attachment 2, Section 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-16  12-18-2024 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 5: DOCUMENTATION AND REGISTRATION OF FCL 
AND RELATED SECURITY ACTIVITIES 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A 
and information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL. 
a. More than one Departmental element may register a security activity for an entity. 
The CSO with the highest security classification level and category of the security 
activity will maintain cognizance of the entity.  
b. When a contractor entity has a contract performance with a lower security 
classification level, but has a possessing security activity requirement, the CSO 
for the possessing contract performance will retain cognizance of the contractor. 
This responsibility may be delegated, by mutual agreement, to another 
Departmental element with a registered security activity at that facility. 
c. Any change in the responsible CSO or survey office must include a transfer of 
appropriate documentation (e.g., safeguards and security (S&S) plans; 
construction project status; FOCI files; etc.) and must be recorded on the FDAR. 
2. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. FCL Documentation. 
(1) SSIMS must be used by all CSOs to register FCL information for which 
they have cognizant security authority, survey cognizance, or 
responsibility for registered security activities. Each registered FCL must 
identify the highest security activity approved for the registered facility. 
(2) DOE F 470.1, Contract Security Classification Specification (CSCS) is 
used to register information in SSIMS concerning all contract vehicles 
requiring PCLs in the performance of the work. Each contract must have a 
unique CSCS form in SSIMS. 
DD FORM 254, Department of Defense Contract Security Classification 
Specification, used by a CSA sponsoring an activity can be submitted in 
lieu of the DOE F 470.1, CSCS. For entry into SSIMS, the information 
will need to be transferred onto DOE F 470.1. 
(3) DOE F 470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record (FDAR) is used to 
record approvals, changes, and terminations of FCL security information 
and other facility changes for entry into SSIMS. 
b. Registration of Security Activities. Security activities are specific, unrelated tasks

--- page 33 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-17 
  
or contract elements involving S&S interests at a facility. Security activities must 
be registered in association with a specific FCL. 
c. Federal Contracting Office. For contracts awarded by a federal contracting office, 
the procurement request originator must submit a DOE F 470.1, CSCS, or DD 
FORM 254 Department of Defense Contract Security Classification Specification, 
to the DOE contracting official, who must forward the completed DOE F 470.1 to 
the CSO. 
d. Prime Contractor. For contracts awarded by a contractor, the prime contractor 
must submit a DOE F 470.1, CSCS, to the CSO. 
e. Security Activities for Existing FCLs. The CSO must: 
(1) Determine and validate all security requirements for the proposed security 
activity. 
(2) Determine the FCL status through SSIMS. 
(3) Compare the security requirements for the activity to the approved FCL in 
the following situations and ensure that: 
(a) When the contractor FCL is granted by a CSO, the requirements for 
accepting an FCL are met. 
(b) When the contractor FCL is granted by DOE: 
1 The new activity will be protected adequately under the 
facility’s existing S&S program as outlined in the facility’s 
approved security plan. 
2 Th e  existing FCL is compatible with the level and category 
of the new security activity. 
3 Th e  facility holds an overall composite satisfactory facility 
rating in the last S&S survey report. 
f. New Security Activities. 
(1) The CSO must verify the information and ensure that the new security 
activity can be performed within the existing FCL. If no issues are 
identified, the CSO will approve the FDAR and CSCS, as appropriate and 
ensure that it is registered in SSIMS. 
(2) When a new activity exceeds the current FCL, or if there is no FCL, all 
actions required to upgrade the current level or obtain an FCL must be 
completed prior to contract award.

--- page 34 ---
Attachment 2, Section 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-18  12-18-2024 
  
 
g. Modifying Security Activities. 
(1) When a security activity is modified (e.g., period of performance, scope of 
work, classification level/category, place of performance, etc.), a revised 
CSCS must be submitted to the CSO. 
(2) The CSO must verify the information and ensure that the new security 
activity can be performed within the existing FCL. If no issues are 
identified, the CSO should approve the CSCS and must ensure that it is 
updated in SSIMS. 
(3) When a modified activity exceeds or reduces the current FCL needs, all 
actions required to upgrade, downgrade, or terminate the current FCL 
must be completed. 
h. Strategic Partnership Projects (SPP) Activities. 
(1) SPP security activities are registered in SSIMS, or the SPP agreements 
must be available in a locally approved system and must comply with the 
requirements of DOE O 481.1, Strategic Partnership Projects [Formerly 
Known as Work for Others (Non-Department of Energy Funded Work)], 
and DOE O 475.2, Identifying Classified Information, current versions. 
(2) SPP Performed at Other Than DOE-Owned or DOE-Operated Facilities. 
(a) When a CSA stipulates that SPP activities are to be performed by a 
DOE contractor at locations other than DOE-owned or DOE- 
operated facilities, an FCL is required. 
(b) When the FCL is issued by a CSA, the requirements for accepting 
CSA FCLs apply. 
(3) Subcontracting in Connection with SPPs. 
(a) A CSA SPP FCL will be established based on a reciprocity 
agreement between the CSO and the CSA. 
(b) SPP facilities do not require DOE clearances; therefore, the CSA 
will remain responsible for all security aspects to include FOCI, 
KMP clearances, surveys, etc., as outlined in the reciprocity 
agreement. 
(c) A CSCS is required and must be registered in SSIMS under the 
CSA FCL as an OGA Contractor - Strategic Partnership Projects.

--- page 35 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-19 
 
 
i. Special Access. Access to the categories below is limited to personnel who are 
properly briefed and require access to the information, equipment, and/or 
materials to perform the duties associated with the security activity. Contractor 
access to the categories below must be recorded on DOE F 470.1. 
(1) Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) must be selected on the DOE 
F 470.1 when a security activity requires access to classified information 
concerning or derived from intelligence sources, methods, or analytical 
processes that must be handled within formal access control systems 
established by the Director of National Intelligence. 
(a) The Special Security Officer, Office of Intelligence and 
Counterintelligence must provide prior approval of the DOE F 
470.1 before a subcontract involving access to intelligence 
information can be issued to the subcontractor. 
(b) The Field Intelligence Element Special Security Officer or 
Alternate Special Security Officer must sign the DOE F 470.1 for 
security activities involving access to SCI. 
(2) Communications Security (COMSEC) must be selected on the DOE F 
470.1 when: 
(a) The security activity requires access to accountable, non- 
accountable COMSEC and controlled cryptographic items (CCI). 
(b) If a COMSEC account will be required, the DOE F 470.1 must 
contain a statement in the classification guidance section regarding 
the establishment of a COMSEC account. Reference current DOE 
O 470.6, Technical Security Program, current version, for 
additional COMSEC information and requirements. 
(3) Select Critical Nuclear Weapon Design Information (CNWDI) on the DOE 
F 470.1 when applicable. 
(4) Nuclear Weapon Data (NWD)/Sigma. 
(a) NWD/Sigma must be selected on the DOE F 470.1 when a security 
activity requires access to Nuclear Weapon Data and Sigma 
Categories14, 15, and 20. 
(b) Access to NWD and Sigma Categories are authorized only for 
TS/RD, TS/FRD, S/RD, and S/FRD facilities. 
(c) Refer to DOE O 452.8, Control of Nuclear Weapon Data, current 
version, for requirements for authorizing NWD and Sigma access.

--- page 36 ---
Attachment 2, Section 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-20  12-18-2024 
  
 
(d) When Sigma 14 or 15is requested, the site Use Control Site 
Coordinator must provide approval of each security activity (i.e., 
CSCS) prior to registration in SSIMS. 
(e) When Sigma 20 is requested, the Sigma 20 Site Coordinator must 
provide approval of each security activity (i.e., CSCS) prior to 
registration in SSIMS. 
(f) North Atlantic Treaty Organization Information (NATO) must be 
selected on the DOE F 470.1 when a security activity requires 
access to classified information or documents belonging to NATO 
or containing NATO classified information. 
(g) Special Control Markings. Some classified matter may include 
special control markings that impose additional handling and 
dissemination limitations and/or describe the type of information 
involved. 
(5) Foreign Government Information (FGI). 
(a) Verify with the CSA that the prospective subcontractor has the 
appropriate FCL, classified information storage capability and 
review the prime contract to determine if there are any contractual 
limitations for approval before awarding a subcontract. 
(b) Provide appropriate security FGI classification guidance and 
incorporate the pertinent security provisions on the DOE F 470.1. 
j. Exceptions to SSIMS Registration. Details concerning sensitive or classified 
activities, the publication of which in SSIMS would compromise mission 
completion, are not registered in SSIMS. Foreign intelligence information, SCI, 
SAPs, and other sensitive activities requiring special access or procedures 
associated with receipt, storage, processing, and/or handling must conform to the 
applicable protection provisions of Executive Orders and to applicable 
Intelligence Community Directives. Exceptions to the registration requirements 
are identified below. 
(1) SAPs. SAPs are not registered in SSIMS. SAPs are registered in 
accordance with DOE O 471.5, Special Access Programs, current version. 
(2) SCI. SCI Security Programs are not registered in SSIMS; however, each 
accredited SCI facility (SCIF) must be recorded in SSIMS using DOE F 
470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record (FDAR). 
Note:  The registration of classified or sensitive details must not be entered 
into SSIMS.

--- page 37 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 6 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-21 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 6: INTERIM AND LIMITED FCLS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. INTERIM FCL. The DOE cognizance security office may grant an interim FCL on a 
temporary basis, pending the completion of full investigative requirements for KMP 
personnel security clearances.10 
a. Interim FCLs will only be granted when KMP personnel security clearances are 
pending with the Cognizance Personnel Security Office (CPSO). 
(1) All other eligibility requirements (e.g., favorable FOCI determination, 
approved security plans, satisfactory survey, as applicable) must be 
finalized prior to the grant of an interim FCL. 
(2) Interim FCLs must be registered in SSIMS. 
b. When final personnel security clearances have been granted to all personnel 
required to be cleared in connection with the FCL, a final FCL must be granted 
and registered in SSIMS via an updated DOE F 470.2, Facility Data and 
Approval Record (FDAR). 
c. When a KMP personnel security clearance is withdrawn, suspended, cancelled, or 
terminated, the interim FCL must also be suspended. The FCL cannot be 
converted back to active status until the new KMP is in process or granted. 
d. Contractors under FOCI or those with foreign nationals as KMP are not eligible 
for interim FCLs. 
2. LIMITED FCL. The United States has entered into agreements with certain foreign 
governments that establish arrangements whereby a foreign-owned U.S. company may be 
considered eligible for an FCL without any additional FOCI negation or mitigation 
instrument.  Limited FCLs ensure that the release of information or access to security 
assets is in accordance with the U.S. National Disclosure Policy.  
a. A limited FCL must be restricted to one security activity involving classified 
information or DOE security assets. 
b. Award another security activity to the same facility involving such information 
requires a separate FCL registration under another limited FCL, or under an FCL 
 
10 "Interim FCLs" are also known as "Temporary FCLs" and may be used interchangeably within other 
NISP Agencies.

--- page 38 ---
Attachment 2, Section 6 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-22  12-18-2024 
  
 
without restrictions, if appropriate. 
c. Issuance of a limited FCL requires that strict access restrictions must be imposed 
to limit the access to the scope of the contract. 
d. Limited FCLs are granted solely at the discretion of DOE upon satisfaction of all 
criteria and requirements. 
(1) All FCL approval requirements apply to a limited FCL. 
(a) Verification of an agreement authorizing the exchange of the 
classified information or matter involved to the country from which 
the foreign ownership is derived. 
(b) Access to classified information or matter will be limited to 
performance on a contract, subcontract, or program involving the 
government of the country from which foreign ownership is 
derived. 
(c) Release of classified information or matter must be in conformity 
with the U.S. National Disclosure Policy. 
(2) In extraordinary circumstances, a limited FCL may be granted when the 
criteria listed above cannot be satisfied, provided there exists a compelling 
need to do so consistent with national security interests. 
(3) Limited FCL Compelling Need Statement. Each request for clearance 
under a limited FCL must be accompanied by a statement of compelling 
need from the GCA. 
(a) The GCA’s compelling need statement must be signed by the head 
of the cognizant DOE program office and include the following: 
1 Acknowledgment that the company will be under FOCI 
(i.e., FOCI will not be mitigated). 
2 A cknowledgment that the GCA/Departmental element 
accepts the risks inherent in the 
3 gr anting of an FCL where FOCI is not mitigated. 
4 A foreign disclosure determination stating the basis for 
determining that release of classified to the foreign 
government involved is in conformity with U.S. National 
Disclosure Policy.

--- page 39 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 7 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-23 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 7: FACILITY CLEAREANCE SUSPENSIONS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. REASONS FOR SUSPENSION. The CSO, in coordination with the ODFSA, must 
suspend the FCL and register the suspension in SSIMS when the following conditions 
occur: 
a. A contractor is determined to be under FOCI that has not been mitigated, the FCL 
must be suspended. Contract performance on activities involving proscribed 
information must not continue until all applicable FOCI requirements are met. 
b. Findings or other deficiencies in a survey, self-assessment, inspection, or 
evaluation indicate suspension of a FCL is necessary due to non-compliance with 
FCL or other requirements. 
(1) The CSO will determine if the FCL must be suspended pending validated 
corrective actions. 
(2) The prime contractor may recommend the CSO suspend the FCL of a 
contractor under their cognizance. 
c. Any required KMP that is not cleared at the level of the FCL.  
(1) Once the KMP is verified to be in process with the CPSO, the FCL may be 
registered as an Interim FCL.  
(2) When the KMP clearance is granted, the FCL can be registered as a final. 
d. A CSA or CSO invalidates or suspends the FCL issued under its cognizance. 
e. Noncompliance with security and reporting requirements. 
f. Mergers/Acquisitions that impact the cleared contractor’s business structure, 
operations, and/or work involving security activities and/or assets. 
2. ACTIONS. The CSO, in coordination with the ODFSA, must take the following actions 
when it suspends a contractor’s FCL: 
a. Notify the contractor, in writing, that its FCL has been suspended. Notification 
must include: 
(1) The reason for the suspension, required corrective actions, and associated 
timeline, and provisions for current contract extensions. 
(2) Award of new contracts to the facility will not be permitted until the

--- page 40 ---
Attachment 2, Section 7 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-24  12-18-2024 
  
 
facility has been restored to a fully valid status.  
(3) Except for KMP, as designated by the CSO, no new personnel security 
clearances may be requested or processed. 
(4) Termination of the FCL may result if the issues causing the suspension, as 
identified by the CSO, in the written notification are not rectified within 
the time frame and manner specified; and 
(5) For possessing facilities, the suspension notification must include 
instructions for securing security assets at an approved cleared facility. 
(6) Contractors must take immediate action to implement these instructions. 
b. Notify the GCA of the suspension. 
(1) The GCA must make the final decision to continue the contractor’s 
performance on existing contracts. 
(2) The ODFSA must evaluate the contractor’s security program to ensure 
security assets that remain in the contractor’s possession are protected. 
c. Notify all affected DOE elements and applicable CSAs of the suspension. 
3. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH MITIGATION PLANS. When the CSO determines that a 
cleared contractor or its tier parent is out of compliance with an approved FOCI 
mitigation plan, the CSO will analyze and evaluate the overall impact to the protection of 
security interests. The CSO must take the appropriate actions: 
a. Notify the cognizant contracting officer immediately. 
b. Request a corrective action and implementation plan from the contractor to bring 
it into compliance with the approved mitigation plan. The contractor must 
immediately supply the plan and all related information upon request 
c. Suspend the FCL. The CSO must ensure contractors immediately comply with all 
instructions from the CSO pertaining to the suspension. 
d. Terminate the FCL. When the CSO terminates a contractor’s FCL, the contractor 
must immediately comply with instructions and termination requirements set forth 
in Section 8 of this Attachment. 
4. CONTINUATION OF CONTRACT PERFORMANCE UNDER FOREIGN 
GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP. In accordance with the intent of 10 U.S.C. Section 
2536, Award of certain contracts to entities controlled by a foreign government: 
prohibition, when an existing contractor becomes foreign government owned, but 
execution of a novation agreement is not required by the DEAR, the continued 
performance by that contractor on existing classified contracts or contracts for

--- page 41 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 2, Section 7 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-25 
 
environmental restoration, remediation, or waste management that involve proscribed 
information may only continue under FCL suspension if: 
a. The contractor is eligible for continuation on such work by Secretarial and/or CSA 
Secretarial waiver under 10 U.S.C. Section 2536(b)(1)(A) or 10 U.S.C. Section 
2536(b)(1)(B), as applicable. 
b. Each GCA takes immediate action to request a waiver under 10 U.S.C. Section 
2536(b)(1)(A) or 10 U.S.C. Section 2536(b)(1)(B), as applicable. 
c. Appropriate actions are taken to safeguard the security assets. 
5. REINSTATEMENT OF A SUSPENDED FCL. The CSO may reinstate the FCL when 
the conditions that resulted in the suspension are resolved. The reinstatement must be 
based on the necessity to complete or continue work associated with the original FCL.

--- page 42 ---
Attachment 2, Section 8 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-26  12-18-2024 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
SECTION 8: SECURITY ACTIVITY/FCL TERMINATION 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. SECURITY ACTIVITY TERMINATION.  
a. When a security activity ends, the CSO and/or ISSP must enter a final DOE F 
470.1, Contract Security Classification Specification (CSCS), into SSIMS to 
reflect the termination of each security activity.   
b. If other registered security activities exist, CSOs and/or ISSPs must follow the 
"Transferring FCL Cognizance" requirements in Section 2 of this Attachment.  
c. Non-Possessing Facilities. Upon termination of each security activity, the 
contractor must submit a certification certifying that all personnel security 
clearances connected with the contract have been transferred to another contract 
under the same Facility Code or terminated within 30 days. 
d. P ossessing Facilities. Upon return, reallocation, disposition, or destruction of all 
classified matter pertaining to a security activity, the contractor must submit a 
certificate of non-possession to the CSO. The certificate must include the contract 
number and a statement that all classified matter has been returned to authorized 
representatives of DOE or destroyed. 
(1) Upon termination of each security activity, the contractor must submit a 
certification certifying that all personnel security clearances connected 
with the contract have been transferred to another contract under the same 
Facility Code or terminated. 
(2) For security activities involving special accesses (SCI, SAP, COMSEC, 
etc.), the respective office must take action to ensure that all classified 
interests have been appropriately dispositioned. 
(3) Contractors are not permitted to retain SNM/OANM. 
(4) Certificate of Possession must: 
(a) Describe DOE’s benefit and the contractor’s intended use of the 
information. 
(b) Identify the specific classified matter by subject, type or form, and 
quantity. 
(c) State that the classified matter will retain its initial classification 
until downgraded or declassified by DOE.

--- page 43 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 2, Section 8 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 2-27 
  
(d) Certify that security assets will be safeguarded in accordance with 
DOE requirements. 
1 The contractor must immediately report potentially 
compromised and/or unaccounted for security assets to the 
CSO, and 
2 Acknowledge that unauthorized disclosure of classified 
matter is subject to criminal penalties. 
(5) All requests to retain security assets must be provided to the CSO for 
approval prior to the termination of the security activity. 
(a) The CSO must notify the contractor, in writing, of the decision. 
1 If the security assets will aid the contractor in performing 
another active government contract and the matter is being 
transferred to the active contract, the contractor must 
provide the CSO and the CSA holding the contract a copy 
of the retention notification. 
2 If the contractor does not receive the required notification, 
the matter may be transferred and will fall under the 
jurisdiction of the gaining (i.e., active) contract. 
(b) When a certificate of possession is submitted, the contractor may 
maintain the security assets for up to 24 months, unless otherwise 
notified by the CSO having authority over the security assets. 
For classified matter belonging to another CSA, the CSO must 
obtain concurrence from the CSA. 
2. FCL TERMINATION. 
a. When the last security activity ends and/or an FCL is no longer necessary, the 
FCL must be terminated. 
b. Prior to termination, the CSO must: 
(1) Ensure all personnel security clearances connected to the FCL are 
terminated. 
(2) Ensure all DOE security assets are appropriately reallocated, disposed of, 
destroyed, or returned to an authorized DOE Federal or contractor with the 
appropriate FCL level. 
c. For Possessing facilities, the CSO must complete a termination survey; and

--- page 44 ---
Attachment 2, Section 8 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 2-28  12/8/2024 
  
 
d. An updated DOE F 470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record (FDAR) must be 
entered into SSIMS to reflect the termination. 
3. REACTIVATION. Reactivations of terminated FCLs must be based on programmatic or 
mission need and the implementation of current security requirements.  
a. The CSO must:  
(1) Validate that all security requirements (e.g., FOCI, KMP personnel 
security clearances, etc.) have been implemented,  
(2) Must complete a DOE F 470.2, Facility Data and Approval Record 
(FDAR), and  
(3) Must update SSIMS to complete the reactivation.

--- page 45 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
FOREIGN OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, OR INFLUENCE PROGRAM 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL. 
a. Foreign investment plays an important role in maintaining the vitality of the U.S. 
industrial base. Therefore, it is the policy of the U.S. Government to allow foreign 
investment consistent with the national security interests of the United States. 
b. The DOE Foreign Ownership, Control, or Influence (FOCI) policy for U.S. 
companies subject to a facility clearance (FCL) determination is intended to 
facilitate foreign investment by ensuring that foreign firms cannot undermine U.S. 
security and export controls to gain unauthorized access to critical technology 
and/or classified information or matter, including RD, FRD, and SNM/OANM. 
c. The FOCI program regulates DOE determinations of the degree to which a 
contractor facility is under foreign ownership, control, or influence. In accordance 
with 48 CFR Chapter 9, the DOE Acquisition Regulation (DEAR), DOE must 
obtain information about FOCI that is sufficient to help the Department determine 
whether award of a contract to a person or firm, or the continued performance of a 
contract by a person or firm, may pose undue risk to the common defense and 
security. 
d. A contractor cannot be under FOCI to such a degree that granting or continuing an 
FCL would be inconsistent with U.S. national security interests. The requirements 
of the National Industrial Security Program (NISP) form the baseline for this 
program, supplemented with requirements for the protection of DOE-specific 
assets, Restricted Data, SNM/OANM, and other security activities. 
2. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Cognizant Security Office (CSO). The CSO and/or the Industrial Security Service 
Provider (ISSP)11, as designated by the Program Secretarial Officer or, for NNSA, 
the Office of the Administrator through the Office of Defense Nuclear Security, 
must ensure that the following activities are accomplished under the FOCI 
program for facilities and sites under their cognizance and for ensuring that 
contractors under their cognizance accomplish their responsibilities under this 
program at contractor facilities. Procedures applicable to the FOCI program must 
be documented in facility or site security plans.
 
11 For the purposes of this Attachment, CSO and ISSP may be interchangeable to identify FOCI responsibilities.

--- page 46 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-2   12-18-2024 
 
 
b.  
(1) Ensure FOCI determinations are rendered for all contractors and their tier 
parents as required. 
(2) Establish and implement procedures to ensure coordination is 
accomplished between the FCL and FOCI programs. 
(3) Ensure that all relevant aspects of FOCI are resolved and, if necessary, 
appropriately mitigated prior to the granting of an interim or final FCL. 
(4) Establish reporting requirements and timelines for which contractors must 
report changes to the FOCI determination. 
(5) Ensure that contractors under their cognizance meet reporting 
requirements as established in DOE directives and national standards. 
(6) Establish and determine the circumstances under which a contractor will 
be requested to complete a new FOCI package. 
(7) Ensure that contractors under FOCI mitigation comply with all 
requirements imposed by the mitigation instrument. 
(8) Ensure that procedures are in place for verification of the original 
signature on the Standard Form (SF) 328, Certificate Pertaining to Foreign 
Interest, prior to finalizing a FOCI determination. 
(9) Ensure that counterintelligence threat and technology transfer risk 
assessments and updates are obtained and evaluated as necessary in the 
administration of the FOCI program. 
(10) Ensure that annual review and certification requirements or alternative 
methods as permitted by this Order, for contractors under a FOCI 
mitigation instrument, are met for all such contractors under their 
cognizance. 
(11) Ensure that when factors not related to ownership are present, contractors 
take appropriate positive measures to assure that the foreign interest can 
be effectively mitigated and cannot otherwise adversely affect 
performance on contracts. 
(12) Approve trustees, proxy holders, and outside directors nominated by 
contractors in connection with FOCI mitigation plans and approve specific 
measures such as technology control plans developed and implemented by 
contractors as part of FOCI mitigation plans. 
(13) Evaluate changes in FOCI information submitted by contractors holding 
an FCL, and make changes in mitigation methods or security

--- page 47 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-3 
 
 
requirements, or suspend or terminate the FCL, as warranted to address 
changed conditions. 
(14) Establish an appeals process for disputing a FOCI determination or 
National Interest Determinations (NIDs) non-concurrence. 
c. Contractors. Contractors must ensure that the following activities are accomplished 
for the FOCI program. An FCL will not be granted until all relevant aspects of 
FOCI have been resolved and, if necessary, appropriately mitigated. Procedures 
applicable to the FOCI program must be documented in facility or site security 
plans. 
(1) Establish and maintain activities related to FOCI in accordance with the 
requirements contained in this directive and in national policies. 
(2) In all FOCI activities, provide complete information to enable the DOE 
cognizant security office and/or other DOE Federal authorities to ascertain 
the attendant risk and whether classified information and other security 
assets are adequately protected, including but not limited to accurate and 
complete submissions of Standard Form (SF) 328, Certificate Pertaining to 
Foreign Interest, and information provided during annual certification and 
review activities. 
(3) Ensure changes reported by contractors which might affect the FOCI 
determination are reported, via e-FOCI to the respective DOE or NNSA 
cognizant security office and/or other DOE Federal authorities upon 
notification.  
(a) Comply with all reporting requirements related to FOCI.  
(b) Maintain all records pertaining to FOCI, including records such as 
original signatures on the SF 328 if instructed by the DOE 
cognizant security office, and make such records available upon 
request to the CSO.  
(c) Complete a new FOCI package when directed to do so by the DOE 
cognizant security office or on a schedule established by that 
office. 
(4) Propose appropriate FOCI mitigation instruments and work with the CSO 
to develop a suitable FOCI mitigation plan in accordance with national 
drivers and regulatory guidance. 
(5) Comply with all requirements and restrictions imposed by an approved 
FOCI mitigation plan. 
(6) Furnish annual review and certification information one year from the 
effective date of a mitigation agreement and annually thereafter.

--- page 48 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-4  12-18-2024 
  
 
(7) Complete required Facility Security Officer (FSO) and Insider Threat 
Program Senior Official training in accordance with Attachment 2 of this 
Order. 
(8) When issues not related to ownership are present, take appropriate positive 
measures to assure that the foreign interest is effectively mitigated and 
cannot adversely affect security assets and performance on contracts.   
(9) When FOCI is mitigated through use of a Voting Trust, Proxy Agreement, 
Special Security Agreement (SSA) or Security Control Agreement (SCA), 
establish a permanent committee of the organization’s board of directors 
as the government security committee. 
3. FOCI PROGRAM INFORMATION. 
a. General. 
(1) FCL must not be granted until all relevant aspects of FOCI have been 
resolved and, if necessary, appropriately mitigated. Appropriate 
procedures must be in place to ensure coordination between the FOCI and 
FCL programs under the jurisdiction of each DOE program office. 
(2) The determination of whether a U.S. company is under FOCI must be 
made on a case-by-case basis. In instances where the company is unable to 
identify a foreign owner (e.g., the participating investors in a foreign 
investment or hedge fund cannot be identified), CSO may determine that 
the company is not eligible for an FCL. The following are examples of 
factors that must be considered to determine whether a company is under 
FOCI, is eligible for an FCL despite FOCI issues, and the protective 
measures required to mitigate FOCI: 
(a) Foreign intelligence threat, including record of economic and 
government espionage against U.S. targets. 
(b) Risk of unauthorized technology transfer. 
(c) Type and sensitivity of classified information or matter, or 
SNM/OANM to be accessed. 
(d) The nature, source, and extent of FOCI, including whether foreign 
interests hold a majority or substantial minority position in the 
company, taking into consideration all immediate, intermediate, 
and ultimate parent companies. 
(e) Record of compliance with pertinent U.S. laws, regulations, and 
contracts.

--- page 49 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3, Section 3, Chapter 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-5 
  
(f) Nature of bilateral and multilateral security and information 
exchange agreements that may be relevant. 
(g) Whether the government of the foreign interest has industrial 
security and export control regimes in place that are comparable to 
those of the United States. 
(h) Ownership or control, in whole or in part, by a foreign government. 
(3) Development of security measures to mitigate the impact of unacceptable 
FOCI must be based on the concept of risk management. 
(4) If there is a change in a company with an existing FCL that impacts a 
favorable FOCI determination, the FCL must be suspended or terminated 
unless security measures are taken to remove the possibility of 
unauthorized access or adverse impacts to contract performance. 
(5) Any doubt that unacceptable FOCI can be effectively mitigated to the 
point that affording the applicant access to classified information or matter 
is clearly consistent with national security must be resolved in favor of the 
national security. 
b. Applicability. 
(1) FOCI determinations must be rendered on the following: 
(a) Applicants, including industrial, educational; commercial; or any 
other entity, grantee, or licensee that have or anticipate executing a 
contract requiring access authorizations, including individuals 
contracting as a business. This includes subcontractors of any tier, 
consulting firms, agents, grantees, and cooperative research and 
development agreement participants who require security 
clearances. 
(b) All tier parents of applicants when the parent is located in the 
United States, Puerto Rico, or a U.S. possession or trust territory 
(DEAR, section 925.204-73[f]). 
(2) A FOCI determination is not required for an individual performing work 
under a consulting agreement (e.g., an individual awarded a contract who 
has not contracted as a business). Foreign involvement for such 
individuals is determined and adjudicated through the background 
investigation conducted for the security clearance. 
(3) When a local, State, or Federal agency or department is granted an FCL, 
there must be an agreement containing a security clause, which must state 
that if the government agency or department subcontracts any work 
requiring access to classified information or matter by a commercial entity

--- page 50 ---
Attachment 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-6  12-18-2024 
  
 
in connection with the FCL, a FOCI determination is required. If the 
government agency or department does not have its own FOCI policies or 
an agreement with the Secretary of Defense for industrial security 
services, DOE will render the FOCI determination. 
(4) Contractors with existing U.S. Government FCLs are identified in SSIMS 
and/or Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency National 
Industrial Security System. No further FOCI review is required for an 
applicant registered in either of these systems holding an equal or higher 
U.S. Government FCL based upon a favorable FOCI determination. 
c. Electronic Submission/Processing Web Site. The Department has an electronic 
system for submission of FOCI information to DOE. To ensure confidentiality of 
the information submitted and stored on the system, the site is protected with 128- 
bit encryption. 
(1) Applicants must use this system for the submission of FOCI packages, 
including changes to update their FOCI information. The FOCI Website 
may be accessed via an Internet browser at https://foci.anl.gov. Electronic 
signatures are not accepted; therefore, a signed original SF 328, Certificate 
Pertaining to Foreign Interests, executed in accordance with the 
instructions on the certification section of the SF 328, must either be 
submitted to the DOE cognizant security office, or retained by the 
applicant and inspected by the DOE cognizant security office at the 
applicant’s place of business prior to rendering the final FOCI 
determination. 
(2) Federal employees and supporting contractors must use the Electronic 
Submission Processing System Website at https://doefoci.anl.gov.

--- page 51 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-7 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3  
SECTION 1: FOCI PROGRAM PROCESSING 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD (Attachment 1 to 
DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. FOCI PROCESSING. 
a. Determining the Requirements for a FOCI Determination. If the procurement 
request requires security clearances, the DEAR security clauses found at 48 CFR 
Part 952.204-2, Security Requirements, will be included in the contract. For all 
such contracts a DOE F 470.1, Contract Security Classification Specification 
(CSCS), must be completed by the procurement request originator. A DD Form 
254 may be used by a Federal agency sponsoring a contract activity, provided it is 
annotated with the DOE facility code. FOCI information and forms required 
under the security clauses will be submitted via the electronic FOCI website. 
b. Final FOCI Determinations. 
(1) When insufficient lead time is expected between selection and contract 
award for the processing of the FOCI determination, the contracting 
officer may request a cursory review, not a final FOCI determination, of 
the SF 328 submissions of each applicant in the competitive range. 
(2) A final FOCI determination will only be rendered for the successful 
applicant. 
c. Adjudication Level. 
(1) The DOE cognizant security office renders the FOCI determination under 
the following conditions: 
(a) The responses to the FOCI questions do not exceed the thresholds 
in the FOCI Implementation reference tool in the e-FOCI system. 
(b) Exclusion procedures are invoked when the applicant is controlled 
by a parent(s) not requiring security clearances or requiring a lower 
level of access to classified information or matter. 
(2) The Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security (EHSS), or for 
NNSA, the Chief, Office of Defense Nuclear Security, will render FOCI 
determinations that exceed established thresholds. The DOE cognizant 
security office will forward the FOCI submission(s) to EHSS or NNSA 
with: 
(a) the justification for clearance or exclusion, including full details 
pertaining to the proposed contract, and

--- page 52 ---
Attachment 3, Section 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-8  12-18-2024 
 
 
(b) the DOE cognizant security office’s analysis, including a clear 
statement of the reason why a Headquarters determination is 
required. The Headquarters office, in coordination with the Office 
of General Counsel, will provide a final FOCI determination to the 
submitting office. 
(3) A counterintelligence threat assessment and technology transfer risk 
assessment must be obtained and considered prior to a final decision to 
grant an FCL to an applicant under FOCI or to restore an FCL previously 
suspended because of unacceptable FOCI. The DOE cognizant security 
office must coordinate with the DOE Office of Intelligence and 
Counterintelligence (DOE/IN-21) to ensure that the threat assessment and 
technology transfer risk assessments and updates are accomplished. 
d. Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. 
(1) The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) is an 
interagency committee chaired by the Department of the Treasury under 
Section 721 of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. App. 
2170). CFIUS review is a voluntary process which affords an opportunity 
for foreign investors and U.S. persons entering into a covered transaction 
to submit the transaction for review by CFIUS to assess the impact of the 
transaction on national security. DOE policy regarding CFIUS is found in 
DOE O 142.5, Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, 
current version. 
(2) The CFIUS review and the FOCI and FCL processing actions are carried 
out in two parallel but separate processes with different time constraints 
and considerations. 
e. Contracting Officers. Contracting officers must provide electronic or written 
notification to the DOE cognizant security office when: 
(1) they become aware of any changes to an applicant’s FOCI status. 
(2) a requested FOCI review is no longer needed. 
(3) a FOCI determination was rendered on an applicant that was not awarded a 
contract. 
(4) all work on a contract for which a FOCI determination was   rendered is 
within 30 days before termination or completion; or 
(5) security clearances are no longer required in performance of the contract.

--- page 53 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-9 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
SECTION 2: FOCI REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. GENERAL. Contractors are required to report changes that have an impact on the status 
of the FCL. The reporting requirements stated here pertain specifically to the FCL; 
additional requirements related to FOCI issues, personnel security concerns, and other 
security matters are also reportable and can be found in the directives applicable to those 
programs. 
2. U PDATES. Contractors holding an FCL must submit written reports of changed 
conditions and any anticipated changes affecting the FCL when the change or impending 
change is made known. 
a. S ignificant changes . When changes have occurred in the extent and nature of 
FOCI that affect the information in a contractor’s most recent FOCI submission, 
the contractor must provide written notification and supporting documentation 
relevant to the changes to the CSO. Significant changes include but are not 
limited to the following circumstances: 
(1) All circumstances that would change any answer on the SF 328, 
Certificate Pertaining to Foreign Interest, from "No" to "Yes," must be 
reported by submitting a changed condition SF 328. 
(2) A previously reported threshold or factor that was favorably adjudicated by 
the CSO has increased to a level requiring a determination by the Office of 
Environment, Health, Safety and Security or, for NNSA, the Office of 
Defense Nuclear Security. 
(3) When a foreign interest owns five percent or more of a U.S. business 
organization (Questions 1a and 1b, SF 328), a five percent or greater 
increase in the beneficial ownership of a class of equity securities of the 
business organization, or a five percent increase in the beneficial 
ownership of the business itself, as determined by voting or investment 
rights, by one or more foreign interests and/or any U.S. person effectively 
controlled by a foreign interest. 
(4) When a U.S. business organization owns ten percent or more of a foreign 
interest (Question 2, SF 328), any increase equivalent to ten percent or 
more of the tangible net worth of the business organization. 
(5) When a U.S. business organization has foreign national Key Management 
Personnel (KMP) (Question 3, SF 328), appointment of any additional 
foreign national to a position required to be cleared in connection with the 
FCL or to any position identified in the articles of incorporation, by-laws,

--- page 54 ---
Attachment 3, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors  DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-10  12-18-2024 
  
 
articles of organization, or equivalent governance documentation or charter 
for the business organization. 
(6) When a Foreign Person has the power to control selection or tenure of 
KMP/other decisions (Question 4, SF 328), any change in such 
power/authority except amendments or waivers to governance 
documentation either to correct manifest error or which are of a formal, 
minor, or technical nature and do not change materially any person’s 
rights or obligations. 
(7) When there are contracts, agreements, understandings, or arrangements 
with foreign person(s) (Question 5, SF 328), any change expected to result 
in annual payments to or from an entity where the payments exceed 
twenty percent of the U.S. business organization’s annual gross revenues. 
(8) When there is indebtedness, liabilities, or obligations to foreign persons 
(Question 6, SF 328), there is a changed condition reportable on the SF 
328 whenever there is: 
(a) Any new indebtedness to foreign persons which results in a 
liability exceeding ten percent of the tangible net worth of the 
business organization or includes an instrument creating a 
mortgage, deed of trust, pledge, lien, security interest or other 
charge or encumbrance against: 
1 Any of its property, assets or leasehold interests exceeding 
ten percent of the business organizations tangible net 
worth, or 
2 P ledges five percent or more of the voting securities of the 
business organization as collateral. 
(b) Any other new foreign indebtedness where the business 
organization permits to exist a leverage ratio exceeding two to one 
(2:1) based on the business organization’s indebtedness to its 
tangible net worth and calculated on the basis of information set 
forth in its financial statement. 
(9) When the business organization derives five percent or more of total 
revenues/net income from a single foreign person (Question 7a, SF 328), 
with respect to the business organization and that single foreign person, 
any change expected to result in annual payments to or from the business 
organization where the payments exceed an additional ten percent of the 
business organization’s gross revenues.

--- page 55 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-11 
 
 
(10) When the business organization derives thirty percent or more of total 
revenues/net income from foreign persons (Question 7b, SF 328), with 
respect to the business organization and any foreign persons, any change 
expected to result in annual payments to or from the business organization 
where the payments exceed an additional twenty percent of the business 
organization’s annual gross revenue. 
(11) When there are ten percent or more voting securities held in a method 
which does not identify the beneficial owner (Question 8, SF 328), any 
change of five percent or more in the total number of shares held in 
"nominee" shares, in "street names" or in some other method which does 
not identify the beneficial owner or any amendment to the bylaws of the 
business organization or its parent related specifically to voting rights of 
such nominee holders and any requirement regarding notice of any matter 
to be presented by a nominee stockholder at a shareholders meeting 
including any amendment affecting the voting and notice rights and 
obligations of nominee holders and associated persons who fail to make 
timely disclosures required by the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) such as Schedule 13D. 
(12) When there are KMP(s) holding positions or serving as consultants for 
foreign person(s) (Question 9, SF 328), any new position held by persons 
required to be cleared in connection with the FCL (excludes positions 
where the KMP is appointed by the U.S. parent business organization to a 
seat on the board or similar governing body of a foreign subsidiary, 
provided that the business organization promptly gives the CSO notice of 
such appointment). 
(13) When there are any other factors of foreign person control or influence 
(Question 10, SF 328), each change qualifying as an affirmative answer to 
this question on the SF 328 and each change having a material effect on 
the ownership, control or influence of the business, operations, prospects, 
condition (financial or otherwise), or property of the business organization 
such that the security measures contemplated by an agreement with DOE 
to mitigate FOCI would not reasonably be expected to remove the 
possibility of unauthorized access to or adverse effect on the performance 
of classified contracts. 
(14) A previously reported foreign ownership threshold or factor that was 
favorably adjudicated has increased to the extent that a FOCI mitigation 
method (if none previously existed) or a different FOCI mitigation method 
is required. 
(15) Any changes in ownership or control, including stock transfers that affect 
control of the company. Notice of changes includes ownership or control 
events that are required to be reported to the SEC, the Federal Trade 
Commission, or the Department of Justice.

--- page 56 ---
Attachment 3, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-12  12-18-2024 
 
 
b. Anticipated changes. Anticipated changes are events that arise when the 
contractor or any of its tier parents enter into formal negotiations toward 
agreement or acquisition, e.g., when the parties enter a written memorandum of 
understanding); in the case of financing agreements, or when written application 
for financing is made. The contractor must provide the CSO with written 
notification of anticipated actions, including but not limited to the following: 
(1) An action to terminate business or operations of the contractor or any of 
its parents for any reason, including but not limited to entering into any 
transaction of merger, consolidation, or amalgamation with another 
company; conveying, selling, leasing, transferring, or otherwise disposing 
of all or a substantial part of company business or assets; and/or making 
any material change that could have an adverse effect on the contractor 
organization’s ability to perform its contractual obligations for DOE or 
other contractors of DOE. 
(2) Legal actions taken to initiate bankruptcy proceedings involving the 
contractor organization or any of its tier parents. 
(3) Imminent adjudication of/or reorganization resulting from bankruptcy 
actions involving the contractor organization or any of its tier parents. 
(4) Entry by the contractor or its tier parents into negotiations with foreign 
nationals that may reasonably be expected to require amendment of the SF 
328, including but not limited to negotiations for the sale of securities to a 
foreign national or citizens. 
3. OTHER REPORTABLE CHANGES. 
a. Changes to name or address of the company or any of its cleared locations. 
b. Any changes to information previously submitted for KMP, including, if 
appropriate, the names of the individuals they are replacing. In addition, a 
statement including the following information must be provided to the CSO: 
(1) Date and place of birth, social security number, citizenship, and, if 
appropriate, personnel security clearance level and issuing agency. 
(2) If they have been excluded from access to security assets. 
(3) If they have been temporarily excluded from access to security assets 
pending the granting of the DOE access authorization.

--- page 57 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3, Section 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-13 
 
 
c. A new complete listing of KMP will be submitted to the CSO upon request.   
d. Any pre-contract negotiation or award not placed through a government 
contracting activity that involves or may involve the release or disclosure of U.S. 
security assets to a foreign interest or access to classified information furnished by 
a foreign interest. 
e. Contractors must provide a current list of all classified contracts and classified 
subcontracts issued to other contractors upon request. 
f. Contractors must provide security costs charged to the government upon request. 
g. The data points will be used by the DOE in developing the annual Report to the 
Director, Information Security Oversight Office.

--- page 58 ---
Attachment 3, Section 2, Chapter 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-14 12-18-2024 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
SECTION 2, CHAPTER 1: CHANGES TO FOCI INFORMATION 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
4. CHANGES TO FOCI INFORMATION. 
a. FOCI changes that occur following submission of an SF 328 and before contract 
award. When an applicant has submitted a comprehensive FOCI package to the 
contracting officer and changes have occurred in the FOCI of the company prior 
to contract award, the applicant must submit an updated SF 328 and associated 
documents within the timeframe established by the CSO. DOE cognizant security 
offices must review the updated information and take any necessary steps to 
resolve FOCI concerns before the contract is awarded. 
 Failure to provide timely updates to the CSO may result in suspension of the FCL. 
b. Updates. Changed conditions, such as a change in ownership, indebtedness, or 
foreign intelligence threat, justify adjustments to the security requirements under 
which a company is operating or require that a different FOCI mitigation method 
be used.  
(1) A changed condition may result in a determination that a company is no 
longer considered to be under FOCI or, conversely, that a company is no 
longer eligible for an FCL.  
(2) Contractors holding an FCL based upon a favorable FOCI determination 
must submit written reports of changed conditions and anticipated changes 
which affect the FCL.  
(3) Changes must be analyzed by the DOE cognizant security office to ensure 
that the contractor continues to meet the standards for holding an FCL.  
(4) DOE cognizant security offices may request updated information, 
including the submission of a new FOCI package, at any time outside the 
normal cycle of package submission requirements.  
(5) Significant changes that warrant a new FOCI determination include the 
following: 
(a) A new threshold or factor exists that did not exist when the 
previous determination was made.  
(b) A previously reported threshold or factor that was favorably 
adjudicated by the DOE cognizant security office has increased to a 
level requiring a determination by EHSS or NNSA.

--- page 59 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3, Section 3, Chapter 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-15 
  
(c) A previously reported financial threshold or factor that was 
favorably adjudicated has increased by 5 percent or more; or a shift 
has occurred of 5 percent or more by country location, end user, or 
lenders. 
(d) Previously reported foreign ownership threshold or factor that was 
favorably adjudicated has increased to the extent that a FOCI 
mitigation method or a different FOCI mitigation method is 
required. 
(e) Any changes in ownership or control, to include partnerships and 
joint ventures. 
(f) Incidents of counterintelligence interest or concern identified and 
reported to the cognizant security office by the servicing 
counterintelligence office after the initial FOCI determination may 
also warrant a new determination. 
c. Annual Review and Certification. The DOE cognizant security office will develop 
procedures to ensure that contractors provide adequate information to enable the 
DOE office to conduct a meaningful evaluation of compliance with annual review 
and certification requirements. Each contractor holding an FCL under a FOCI 
mitigation instrument must provide written annual certification to the DOE 
cognizant security office that no changes have occurred which would impact the 
contractor’s ability to protect classified information or matter or otherwise impact 
to national security. 
(1) The certification report must include: 
(a) A detailed description of the manner in which the contractor is 
carrying out its obligations under the agreement. 
(b) Changes to security procedures, implemented or proposed, and the 
reasons for the changes. 
(c) A detailed description of any acts of noncompliance, whether 
inadvertent or intentional, with a discussion of steps that were taken 
to prevent such acts from recurring. 
(d) Any changes or impending changes of key management personnel 
or key board members, including the reasons for the changes. 
(e) Any changes or impending changes in the organizational structure 
or ownership, including any acquisitions, mergers, or divestitures. 
Any other issues that could have a bearing on the effectiveness of 
the applicable agreement. Any contractor controlled by a parent 
organization(s) that has/have been excluded by formal resolution

--- page 60 ---
Attachment 3, Section 2, Chapter 1 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-16   12-18-2024 
  
 
must provide written certification on an annual basis to the DOE 
cognizant security office acknowledging the continued 
effectiveness of the resolution. 
(2) Any contractor that has executed a Board Resolution to reduce FOCI in 
non-controlling foreign ownership situations must provide annual written 
certification to the DOE cognizant security office acknowledging that the 
resolution remains in effect. 
(3) Representatives of the DOE cognizant security office must meet annually 
(at least every 12 months) with the senior management officials who 
comprise the Government Security Committee (GSC) of organizations 
operating under a Voting Trust Agreement, Proxy Agreement, SSA, or 
SCA to review the effectiveness of the pertinent security arrangement and 
to establish a common understanding of the operating requirements and 
their implementation.  
(a) If annual meetings cannot be conducted, CSO must establish other 
methods, such as the submission of a new FOCI package for 
review, to accomplish the same ends. Reviews must include 
examination of the following: 
1 acts of compliance or noncompliance with the approved 
security arrangement, standard rules, and applicable laws 
and regulations. 
2 p roblems or impediments associated with the practical 
application or utility of the security arrangement; and 
3 w hether security controls, practices, or procedures warrant adjustment.

--- page 61 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024 Page 3-17 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3  
SECTION 3: PERSONNEL SECURITY CLEARANCES AND EXCLUSION 
PROCEDURES 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. SECURITY CLEARANCES REQUIRED IN CONNECTION WITH THE FCL.  
a. KMP, as determined by the CSO, must be cleared to the level of the FCL, or 
higher or formally excluded from access, as appropriate.  
b. For MFOs, each subordinate cleared facility’s KMP must also be cleared or 
excluded.   
c. KMP PCL package requests must be submitted to the CPSO within established 
timelines, not to exceed 90 calendar days of notification. Failure to submit KMP 
PCL package requests to the CPSO may result in an FCL suspension or 
withdrawal. 
2. EXCLUSION PROCEDURES. Certain contractor entity officials, e.g., those who either 
hold majority interest or stock in the entity, or who have direct or indirect authority to 
influence or decide issues affecting the management or operations of the contractor or 
classified contract performance, may be excluded from, or cleared at a lower level than 
the FCL. The CSO must ensure the following exclusion actions are completed before 
granting an FCL.  Exclusion actions must be documented by the organization’s governing 
board. A copy of the resolution must be provided via e-FOCI and approved by the CSO. 
a. When a formal exclusion action is required, the organization’s governing body 
must determine the required exclusion action and make the appropriate 
affirmation: 
(1) Affirmation for Exclusion from Access to Classified Information:  
(a) Identify the KMP by their name and position to be excluded, will 
not require, will not have, and can be effectively and formally 
excluded from, access to all classified information disclosed to the 
entity, and  
(b) Does not occupy a position that would enable them to adversely 
affect the organization’s policies or practices in the performance of 
classified contracts.

--- page 62 ---
Attachment 3, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-18   12-18-2024 
  
 
(2) Affirmation for Exclusion from Higher-level Classified Information  
(a) Identify the KMP by their name and position to be excluded, will 
not require, will not have, and can be effectively and formally 
excluded from access to classified information, and  
(b) Does not occupy a position that would enable them to adversely 
affect the organization’s policies or practices in the performance of 
classified contracts. 
3. SECURITY CLEARANCES CONCURRENT WITH THE FCL. 
a. Contractor employees who are not KMP but will perform work on the contract 
may be submitted for PCLs concurrent with the submittal of the FCL request. 
b. The PCL cannot be granted until the interim, limited, or final FCL is registered in 
SSIMS.

--- page 63 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024 Page 3-19 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 
SECTION 4: FOCI MITIGATION 
1. FOCI MITIGATION. 
a. General. If DOE determines that a company is under FOCI, DOE will determine 
the extent and manner in which the FOCI may result in unauthorized access to 
classified information or SNM/OANM and the types of actions that will be 
necessary to mitigate the associated risks to a level deemed acceptable in 
accordance with national drivers and DOE Policy. DOE cognizant security offices 
will ensure that the following are considered in every FOCI evaluation: 
(1) Record of economic and government espionage against U.S. targets. 
(2) Record of enforcement and/or engagement in unauthorized technology 
transfer. 
(3) Record of compliance with pertinent U.S. laws, regulations, and contracts. 
(4) Type and sensitivity of the information to be accessed. 
(5) Source, nature, and extent of FOCI, including but not limited to whether 
foreign persons hold a majority or substantial minority position in the 
company, taking into consideration all immediate, intermediate, and 
ultimate parent companies. 
(6) Nature of any bilateral and multilateral security and information exchange 
agreements that may pertain. 
(7) Ownership or control, in whole or in part, by a foreign government. 
(8) Any other factor that indicates or demonstrates a capability on the part of 
the foreign interests to control or influence the operations or management 
of the business organization concerned. 
b. Mitigation Action Plans. If there are any affirmative answers on the Certificate 
Pertaining to Foreign Interests, or other information is received which indicates 
that the applicant may be under FOCI, the DOE cognizant security office must 
review the case to determine the relative significance of the information regarding 
the following factors: 
(1) Whether the applicant is under FOCI. 
(2) The extent and manner the FOCI may result in unauthorized access to 
classified information or adversely impact classified contract performance. 
The type of actions, if any, that would be necessary to mitigate or negate the 
effects of the FOCI to a level deemed acceptable to the Federal Government.

--- page 64 ---
Attachment 3, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-20 12-18-2024 
 
 
FOCI Mitigation Instruments. The affected organization or its legal 
representatives may propose a plan to negate or reduce unacceptable FOCI. 
(3) DOE must impose any security method, safeguard, or restriction it believes 
necessary to ensure that unauthorized access to classified information or 
matter, or SNM/OANM, is precluded. 
(4) An entity that will not implement the security measures determined 
necessary by DOE to mitigate its foreign involvement to an acceptable 
level is ineligible for a FOCI determination and an FCL. 
(5) Under all methods of FOCI mitigation, management positions requiring 
security clearances in conjunction with the FCL must be filled by U.S. 
citizens residing in the United States. 
c. Secretarial Waiver Authority. In accordance with 10 U.S.C. Section 2536, a 
contract under a national security program must not be awarded to an entity 
controlled by a foreign government if it is necessary for the entity to be given 
access to proscribed information until a waiver has been granted by the Secretary 
concerned (i.e., the Secretary of Energy or the Secretary of Defense). 
(1) Secretarial waivers granted under 10 U.S.C. Section 2536(b)(1)(B) for an 
environmental restoration, remediation, or waste management contract, the 
Secretary must notify Congress of this decision. 
(2) The contract may be awarded or the novation agreement executed only 
after the end of a 45-day period, beginning on the date notification is 
received by the Senate Committee on Armed Services and the House 
Committee on National Security. 
d. Foreign Ownership. A controlling foreign ownership is one in which a foreign 
national(s) owns a majority of the voting securities of the U.S. organization or, if 
less than 50 percent is foreign owned, it can be reasonably determined that non-
U.S. citizens or their representatives are in a position to effectively control the 
business management of the U.S. organization. Where the FOCI stems from 
majority foreign ownership or control, a FOCI mitigation plan may consist of one 
of the following methods: 
(1) Voting Trust Agreement. Under this type of agreement, the foreign owner 
relinquishes most rights associated with ownership of the company to 
cleared U.S. citizens approved by the U.S. Government. 
(a) Foreign owners must transfer legal title of the company to the 
Trustees. 
(b) The Voting Trust Agreement does not impose any restrictions on 
the organization’s eligibility to have access to classified 
information or matter or to compete for classified contracts.

--- page 65 ---
DOE O 470.1A Attachment 3, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024 Page 3-21 
 
 
(c) A Government Security Committee (GSC) must be established 
under the Voting Trust to oversee classified, SNM/OANM, and 
export control activities. 
1 All Trustees must become members of the company’s 
governing board. 
2 T he arrangement must provide for the exercise of all 
prerogatives of ownership by the Trustees with complete 
freedom to act independently from the foreign owners, 
except as provided in the agreement, which may limit the 
authority of the Trustees by requiring approval from the 
foreign owners with respect to matters such as: 
a Th e  sale or disposal of the company’s assets or a 
substantial part thereof; 
b P ledges,  mortgages, or other encumbrances on the 
company’s assets, capital stock or ownership 
interests; 
c Mer gers,  consolidations, or reorganizations; 
d Dissolution of the company; and 
e Filing of a bankruptcy petition. 
3 The Trustees assume full responsibility for the foreign 
owner’s voting interests and for exercising all management 
prerogatives relating thereto in such a way as to ensure that 
the foreign owner will be insulated from the company and 
will solely retain the status of a beneficiary. 
4 Th e  company must be organized, structured, and financed 
to be capable of operating as a viable business entity 
independent from the foreign owner. 
(2) Proxy Agreement. Like the Voting Trust Agreement, under this 
arrangement, the foreign owner relinquishes most rights associated with 
ownership of the company to cleared U.S. citizens approved by the U.S. 
Government. 
(a) Under a Proxy Agreement, the foreign owner’s voting rights are 
conveyed to the Proxy Holders by the irrevocable Proxy 
Agreement. Legal title to the shares remains with the foreign 
national(s).

--- page 66 ---
Attachment 3, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-22 12-18-2024 
 
 
(b) All provisions of a Voting Trust Agreement applicable to Trustees, 
including authorized limitations on the powers of the Trustees, 
must apply to the Proxy Holders. 
(c) The Proxy Agreement does not impose any restrictions on the 
organization’s eligibility to have access to classified information or 
matter or to compete for classified contracts. 
(d) The company must be organized, structured, and financed to be 
capable of operating as a viable entity independent from the 
foreign owner. 
 
(e) Use of a Proxy Agreement requires the establishment of a GSC to 
oversee classified, SNM/OANM, and export control activities. 
(3) Special Security Agreement (SSA).  An SSA may be considered when a 
U.S. organization is effectively owned or controlled by a foreign interest 
and the Federal Government has entered into a general security agreement 
with the foreign government involved. 
(a) The SSA preserves the foreign shareholder’s right to be 
represented on the governing body with a direct voice in the 
business and management of the company while denying 
unauthorized access to classified information or matter, or 
SNM/OANM by imposing substantial security and export control 
measures within an institutionalized set of corporate practices and 
procedures. 
(b) An SSA must: 
1 Require active involvement in security matters of senior 
management and certain Board members (outside 
directors), who must be cleared U.S. citizens. 
2 P rovide for the establishment of a GSC to oversee 
classified, SNM/OANM, and export control activities. 
3 Be b ased  on a Secretarial Waiver as described above if the 
entity is controlled by a foreign government and the 
contract will require access to proscribed information. 
Require an NID prior to release of proscribed information 
to the contractor or its cleared employees to certify that 
release of such information is consistent with the national 
security interests of the United States; provided, however, 
that in accordance with Section 842 of

--- page 67 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3, Section 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-23 
 
 
Public Law 115- 232, covered NTIB entities (as defined at 
Section 842(c)(1) of Public Law 115-232) are not required 
to obtain a NID as a condition for access to proscribed 
information.   
The NID can be program, project, or contract specific. 
e. Non-controlling Foreign Ownership. A non-controlling foreign ownership is one 
in which a foreign national(s) owns less than a majority of the voting securities of 
the U.S. organization and/or is not in a position to effectively control the business 
management of the U.S. organization. Where the FOCI stems from non-
controlling foreign ownership or control, a FOCI mitigation plan must consist of 
either Board Resolution or SCA methods. 
(1) Board Resolution. When a foreign interest does not own voting interests 
sufficient to elect, or otherwise is not entitled to representation on the 
company’s governing board, a resolution by the governing board will 
normally be adequate to mitigate the FOCI concerns. 
(a) The resolution must identify the foreign shareholder and describe 
the type and number of foreign-owned shares; acknowledge the 
company’s obligation to comply with all security and export 
control requirements; and certify that the foreign owner does not 
require, will not have, and can be effectively precluded from 
unauthorized access to all classified and export-controlled 
information entrusted to or held by the contractor. 
(b) Annual certifications must be provided to the DOE cognizant 
security office acknowledging the continued effectiveness of the 
resolution. 
(c) The company must distribute to members of its governing board 
and to its KMP copies of such resolutions, and report in its 
corporate records the completion of this distribution. 
(2) Security Control Agreement (SCA). When a company is not effectively 
owned or controlled by a foreign interest and the foreign interest is 
nevertheless entitled to representation on the company’s governing board, 
a SCA may be used. There are no access limitations under this type of 
agreement. However, the SCA requires the imposition of substantial 
security and export control measures in order to preserve the foreign 
interest’s right to be represented on the board while denying unauthorized 
access to classified information or matter, or SNM/OANM. The SCA 
requires the same active involvement in security matters of senior 
management and certain Board members, and the establishment of a GSC, 
as are required when the SSA is used. 
Limited FCL.  A limited FCL may be granted to certain contractors (e.g., a sole 
source contractor) which are controlled or owned by a foreign interest where

--- page 68 ---
Attachment 3, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 3-24  12-18-2024 
  
 
FOCI mitigation is not able to be implemented. Access limitations are inherent 
with granting limited FCLs. Full requirements for granting a limited FCL are set 
forth in the Attachment 2 of this Order. 
f. Factors Not Related to Foreign Ownership. When factors not related to ownership 
are present, positive measures must be put in place to assure that the foreign 
interest can be effectively mitigated and cannot otherwise adversely affect 
performance on classified contracts. Examples of such measures include: 
(1) Modification or termination of loan agreements, contracts and other 
understandings with foreign interests; 
(2) Diversification or reduction of foreign-source income; 
(3) Demonstration of financial viability independent of foreign interests; 
(4) Elimination or resolution of problem debt; 
(5) Assignment of specific oversight duties and responsibilities to board 
members; 
(6) Formulation of special executive-level security committees to consider and 
oversee matters that affect the performance of classified contracts; 
(7) Physical or organizational separation of the contractor component 
performing on classified contracts; 
(8) The appointment of a technology control officer; 
(9) Adoption of special Board Resolutions; and 
(10) Other actions that negate or mitigate foreign influence. 
g. Noncompliance with Mitigation Plans. When the DOE cognizant security office 
determines that a cleared contractor or its tier parent is out of compliance with an 
approved FOCI mitigation plan, the cognizant security office must analyze the 
noncompliance and evaluate the overall impact to the protection of security 
interests. Depending on the severity of the noncompliance issue and the 
willingness or unwillingness of the organization to correct the problem and return 
to compliance, one or more of the following actions must be taken and the 
cognizant contracting officer notified immediately: 
(1) Request a corrective action and implementation plan from the contractor to 
bring it into compliance with the approved mitigation plan. 
(2) Suspend the FCL. 
Terminate the FCL. An existing FCL must be revoked if security measures

--- page 69 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 3, Section 3 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 3-25 
  
cannot be taken to remove the possibility of unauthorized access or 
adverse effect on contract performance

--- page 70 ---


--- page 71 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 4-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 
CLASSIFIED MAIL CHANNELS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
The Classified Mail Channel (CMC) program regulates physical transmission of classified matter 
between approved Other Government Agency (OGA) or OGA Contractor (OGA-C)] facilities to 
meet the requirements of 32 CFR 2001, 32 CFR 117, 10 CFR 1045, and/or the current versions 
of DOE O 452.8, Control of Nuclear Weapon Data, and DOE O 471.6, Information Security. 
This program provides the means for verifying the classification and storage capabilities of 
approved facilities.  
2. CMC REQUIREMENTS: 
a. Transmission and receipt of classified matter must comply with requirements in 
DOE O 471.6, current version. 
b. Receipt and storage of all classified Nuclear Weapons Data, CNWDI, or Sigmas 
must be processed and approved in accordance with DOE O 452.8, current 
version. 
c. A Statement of Security Assurance is a mechanism to document the CMC 
information and identifies the safeguarding capabilities of the facilities. 
(1) The Designated Responsible Office (DRO) or appropriate Program Office 
is responsible to submit and ensure the information within the Statement 
of Security Assurance is updated periodically. 
(2) Statements of Security Assurance that request CNWDI or Sigmas are valid 
in accordance with DOE O 452.8, current version. 
(3) CMCs that are possessing or non-possessing that do not include CNWDI 
or Sigmas are valid for three years or as identified by the program office 
(whichever is less). 
(4) Revisions, transfers, suspensions, or terminations of SSIMS registrations 
will be facilitated by the DRO. CMCs that include CNWDI or Sigmas the 
action must be processed and approved in accordance with DOE O 452.8, 
current version. 
(5) A Statement of Security Assurance provides the following information: 
(a) An approved classified mailing address. 
(b) The highest level and most restrictive category of classified matter 
or other security asset the facility is authorized to receive and store.

--- page 72 ---
Attachment 4 – Federal Employees and Contractors  DOE O 470.1A 
Page 4-2   12-18-2024 
 
 
(c) A statement that classified national security information will be 
afforded protection according to E.O. 13526, Classified National 
Security Information, and all implementing regulations and 
directives. 
(d) A statement that the requirements of 10 CFR Part 1045, Nuclear 
Classification and Declassification, will be met for RD, FRD, and 
TFNI. 
(e) Assurance that the requirements of the Atomic Energy Act, 
including the mandatory access authorization requirements, will be 
met for access to RD, FRD, and TFNI. 
d. State, local, tribal, and other similar governmental authorities do not have 
authority to self-certify clearance and security capability for handling classified 
information. These entities must be handled in accordance with E.O. 13549, 
Classified National Security Information Program for State, Local, Tribal, and 
Private Sector Entities, and its implementing directives. 
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF A CMC FOR AN OGA. 
a. A Statement of Security Assurance must be submitted for all OGAs exchanging 
any physical classified matter or security asset. 
b. Approval of a CMC must be based upon a written Statement of Security 
Assurance from the OGA that DOE security interests are adequately protected. 
c. A CMC must be verified through SSIMS. If not in SSIMS, a new facility must be 
established. 
4. ESTABLISHMENT OF A CMC FOR AN OGA-C. 
a. Approval of a CMC must be based upon a written Statement of Security 
Assurance or Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA) National 
Industrial Security System (NISS) notification from the OGA-C that DOE security 
interests are adequately protected. 
b. Processing of NWD must be in accordance with DOE O 452.8, current version. 
 
c. CMC must be registered in SSIMS and/or DCSA NISS for an OGA-C 
organization where DOE does not have a contractual interest but must 
communicate or exchange classified matter.12
 
 
12 DCSA NISS may be used to verify OGA-Cs for exchanging classified matter and security interests 
other than NWD.

--- page 73 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 5-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 5 
CONTROL OF CLASSIFIED VISITS 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. OBJECTIVE. Classified information and matter must be protected by ensuring that only 
persons with the appropriate security clearances, need-to-know, and programmatic 
authorizations are afforded access during visits where such information is released or 
exchanged. 
2. P URPOSE . Control of classified visits ensures that access to classified information by 
cleared U.S. citizens or individuals from foreign governments visiting DOE facilities is 
controlled in accordance with the mission of the Department and is consistent with 
national laws and regulations and international treaties and agreements. 
3. DE FINITIONS .  See Attachment 7. Terms commonly used in the DOE S&S Program are 
defined in the DOE PIR tool located at https://pir.doe.gov/. In addition to these 
definitions, the following is provided:  
Senior Federal Official: A  Federal employee officially designated and assigned by the 
Officially Designated Federal Security Authority (ODFSA) to approve classified visits 
involving access to Restricted Data. 
4. RE QUIREMENTS . ODFSAs, as designated by the Program Secretarial Officer or, for 
NNSA, the Office of the Administrator through the Office of Defense Nuclear Security, 
are responsible for ensuring that the following activities are accomplished for the 
classified visits program at facilities and sites under their cognizance and for ensuring 
that contractors under their cognizance accomplish their responsibilities under this 
program at contractor facilities. Procedures applicable to classified visits must be 
documented in site security plans. The cognizant security office with support of the 
contractor must: 
a. Ensure that local procedures are established for processing and handling classified 
visits by cleared individuals.13 
b. Ensure that procedures are established for processing and handling classified 
visits by foreign nationals in accordance with governing international agreements 
or treaties. 
c. Ensure that appropriate procedural limitations for classified foreign national visits 
are documented to preclude access to information not related to the visit and the 
scope of the international treaty or agreements. 
d. Ensure that responsibility for operational approval of classified visits, including 
 
13 See DOE O 472.2, Personnel Security, current version, for personnel security clearance requirements.

--- page 74 ---
Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 5-2  12-18-2024 
 
 
delegations of authority as necessary, is established in writing and documented in 
the appropriate security plan.  The approver must determine that the visit is 
necessary, and the purpose of the visit cannot be achieved without access to, or 
disclosure of, classified information. 
e. Ensure that, when continuing visitor access approval is necessary for individuals 
from other government agencies, who frequently visit DOE facilities, the access 
approval does not exceed a period of 1 year (or for contractors, the final day of a 
contract if less than one year) and that approval is renewed annually if necessary. 
f. Ensure procedures establish that classified visit requests are sent and received 
through a DOE classified visit processing office and the appropriate security 
offices of other Federal government agencies. 
g. Classified visits involving access to RD by cleared U.S. citizens other than 
representatives from DOE, DoD, NASA, and NRC must ensure: 
(1) An authorized senior Federal official at the site verifies through DOE and 
national-level personnel security electronic databases the individual’s 
possession of a security clearance at the requisite level. 
(2) The authorized Senior Federal Official and makes an affirmative, 
documented determination that such access will not endanger the common 
defense and security. 
(3) Individuals are given an appropriate briefing concerning the protection of 
RD prior to being given access; 
(4) Individuals sign an acknowledgement that they have received this briefing. 
h. Ensure procedures establish that access granted for classified visits is tracked and 
maintained as part of the site classified visits file and is not entered into any 
clearance tracking database or extended for any purpose outside the approved 
classified visit. 
i. Ensure procedures establish that all classified information or matter, including the 
individual’s personal notes, to be removed from DOE’s control by individuals 
granted access under paragraph g. above is subjected to a classification review 
and if classified, is sent through the DOE cognizant security office to the 
established classified mailing address listed in SSIMS for the OGA or OGA 
contractor facility which the individual represents. If no classified mailing address 
is registered in SSIMS, one must be established in accordance with the 
requirements in Attachment 4 of this Order, before the material is released. 
Visitors must not hand-carry classified information or matter from DOE premises.

--- page 75 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 5-3 
 
5. VISITS TO DOE FACILITIES BY CLEARED U.S. CITIZENS OTHER THAN DOE 
PERSONNEL. 
a. a. For all classified visits to DOE and DOE contractor facilities, the 
following must be established and verified by the receiving location: 
(1) The identity of the visitor; 
(2) The level and type of clearance held by the visitor, which must allow 
access to the information to be disclosed; and 
(3) That the visit is for an official purpose for which the individual has a 
legitimate need to know and to access the classified information or matter 
to be disclosed. 
b. Appropriate procedural limitations (e.g., use of escorts in limited/restricted areas) 
must be in place to ensure that the visitor has access only to information for which 
the individual has a verified need, and that access to other classified information 
or matter is precluded. 
c. Requests for visits and access to specific types of facilities and information must 
be referred to and approved by the appropriate office: 
(1) For weapons programs, nuclear materials production facilities, or sensitive 
nuclear materials production information, the Deputy Administrator for 
Defense Programs. 
(2) For uranium enrichment plants or facilities engaged in uranium 
enrichment technology development, including advanced isotope 
separation technology, the Office of Nuclear Energy. 
(3) For Naval Nuclear Propulsion facilities, the Deputy Administrator for 
Naval Reactors. 
d. Visits involving access to RD when the visitor does not hold a DOE access 
authorization must be approved by the designated Senior Federal Official. 
Approval must be based upon verification through DOE and national- level 
personnel security electronic databases that the individual holds an appropriate 
final security clearance, unless the individual is in one of the categories described 
below.  
(1) (1) DOE accepts the Q and L access authorizations granted by the 
NRC as valid for access to RD. Visits by NRC employees, consultants, 
contractors, or subcontractors who require access to weapon data, 
sensitive nuclear materials production information, atomic vapor laser 
isotope separation technology, or uranium enrichment technology or entry 
into a DOE classified weapon or production facility must be approved by 
the appropriate Departmental element office. Visits must be requested

--- page 76 ---
Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 5-4  12-18-2024 
 
 
using NRC Form 277, current form. NRC identification badges cannot be 
used as authority for visits. 
(2) (2) Access to RD must be requested on a DOE F 5631.20 (current 
form), or an OGA’s official form, letter, memorandum, or system.   
(a) A memorandum or electronic message signed by the certifying 
official may be used unless access to Nuclear Weapon Data is 
required. For NASA, the visit request must include a certification 
that the matter to which access is requested relates to aeronautical 
and space activities.  
(b) Requests must be forwarded for approval to the appropriate 
Departmental element with jurisdiction over the information to 
which access is requested. Access to critical nuclear weapon 
design information must be specifically requested. 
(3) Prior to being given access, OGA employees and their contractors who are 
granted access to RD and SNM in connection with a classified visit must 
receive an appropriate briefing concerning the protection of RD and SNM 
and must sign an acknowledgement (e.g., DOE F 5631.18 Security 
Acknowledgement or other approved forms.) indicating their 
understanding that access will be terminated at the end of the visit period. 
(4) RD and/or SNM access granted in connection with a classified visit must 
be tracked as part of the local site classified visit tracking process, and 
records of such access must be maintained in the classified visit files. This 
type of access will not be identified as a Q or L access authorization, will 
not be entered in the DOE Central Personnel Clearance Index (CPCI) or 
other clearance tracking databases, and cannot be extended for any 
purpose outside the approved classified visit. 
(5) This process does not apply to classified visits by foreign nationals. 
e. Consult DOE O 452.8, Control of Nuclear Weapon Data, current version, for 
additional requirements concerning when access to NWD Sigma information is 
required. 
6. VISITS BY CLEARED DOE PERSONNEL TO OTHER DOE FACILITIES. 
a. Unless local site procedures require, or access to certain facilities or programs as 
described below will take place, formal visit requests are not required for visits by 
DOE Federal and contractor personnel to other DOE sites. The DOE security 
badge (e.g., HSPD-12 PIV) will serve as evidence of DOE security 
clearance/access authorization for internal DOE visits. 
b. Visitors who require access to nuclear weapon data (classified Secret or Top 
Secret), sensitive nuclear materials production information, inertial confinement

--- page 77 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 5-5 
 
fusion data, atomic vapor laser isotope separation technology, uranium 
enrichment technology, or facilities specifically designated by a Departmental 
element, must obtain approval from the responsible office prior to the visit. 
c. DOE F 5631.20 must be used by DOE Federal and contractor employees to obtain 
programmatic approval for access to Sigmas 14, 15, and/or 20. Approval for 
access must be obtained from the Deputy Administrator for Defense Programs. 
d. Cleared DOE Federal or contractor employees who are foreign nationals may visit 
other facilities only under the access restrictions which apply to their clearances. 
7. CLASSIFIED VISITS TO DOE FACILITIES BY FOREIGN NATIONALS. 
a. Ensure that for all classified visits by foreign nationals to DOE facilities, the 
following must be established and verified: 
(1) The identity of the visitor; 
(2) Assurance that existing treaty or international agreement covers sharing of 
specific classified information with the foreign national; 
(3) Receipt of security assurances from the appropriate foreign embassy or the 
visitor’s government agency; and 
(4) Verification that the appropriate DOE Federal official has approved the 
sharing of the specific information to be disclosed during the classified 
visit. 
b. DOE Federal or contractor employees may be designated to serve as hosts for 
classified visits by foreign nationals. A host must be a U.S. citizen with an access 
authorization equal to or higher than the overall classification of the visit. The 
host must ensure that: 
(1) Foreign nationals are not granted access to classified information before 
approval is received from the appropriate designated authority with 
programmatic responsibility. 
(2) Foreign nationals are precluded from any access to classified information 
outside the scope of the international agreement or treaty governing the 
visit and/or any limitations set by the approval authority with 
programmatic responsibility, and sharing of classified information is in 
accordance with the protocols specifically outlined in the agreement or 
treaty governing the visit (e.g., level, category, and type of classified 
information, protection procedures for incoming classified foreign 
government information, security clearance verification, transmission 
protocols for classified information during and after the visit, post-visit 
documentation, etc.).

--- page 78 ---
Attachment 5 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 5-6  12-18-2024 
 
 
(3) Appropriate procedural limitations (e.g., use of escorts in limited/restricted 
areas) are in place to ensure that the foreign visitor has access only to 
information permitted by the applicable international agreement or treaty 
for which the individual has a verified need, and that access to all other 
classified information or matter is precluded. 
c. Requests for visits and access by foreign nationals to specific types of facilities 
and information must be referred to and approved by the appropriate 
Headquarters office: 
(1) For visits to uranium enrichment plants or facilities and access to 
classified information on uranium enrichment technology development, 
including advanced isotope separation technology, the Office of Nuclear 
Energy. 
(2) For visits and access to classified information in connection with 
nonproliferation, international security, or International Atomic Energy 
Agency requirements, the Deputy Administrator for Defense Nuclear 
Nonproliferation. 
(3) For visits and access to classified information in connection with naval 
nuclear propulsion, the Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors. 
(4) For visits and access to classified information in connection with Sensitive 
Compartmented Information, the Office of Intelligence and 
Counterintelligence. 
8. DOCUMENTATION. Reports of classified visits must be maintained in accordance with 
DOE Administrative Records Schedule 18, paragraph 17.1.

--- page 79 ---
DOE O 470.1A  Attachment 6 – Federal Employees and Contractors 
12-18-2024  Page 6-1 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 6 
INCIDENTS OF SECURITY CONCERN 
This Attachment provides information and/or requirements associated with DOE O 470.1A and 
information and/or requirements applicable to contracts in which the associated CRD 
(Attachment 1 to DOE O 470.1A) is inserted. 
1. OBJECTIVE. To ensure the occurrence of an event with detrimental impacts on National 
Security or Departmental security assets prompts the appropriate graded response, to 
include an assessment of the potential impacts, appropriate notification, extent of 
condition, and corrective actions to prevent recurrence. The long-term management of 
Incidents of Security Concern (IOSCs) serves as an effective Program Planning and 
Management (PPM) tool for enhancing the specific implementation of security policies 
(e.g., site-specific implementation). 
2. P URPOSE . To set forth requirements for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) IOSCs 
process, including timely identification, notification, inquiry, reporting, and closure of 
IOSCs. The IOSC program serves multiple purposes to include: 
a. Ensuring IOSCs are communicated to DOE/National Nuclear Security 
Administration (NNSA) management, U.S. Congress, other agencies, or foreign 
governments, as appropriate; 
b. Meeting regulatory reporting requirements; 
c. Ensuring IOSCs are assessed relative to the impact to national security and the 
collateral impact with other programs and security assets; 
d. Enhancing the ability to track and trend the health of DOE federal and contractor 
security programs; 
e. Enabling mechanisms to support performance assurance, self-assessment, 
oversight, security awareness, and other key security functions by providing 
relevant IOSC data; and 
f. Enhancing the ability to influence safeguards and security (S&S) policy 
development and implementation. 
3. DEFINITIONS. See Attachment 7. Terms commonly used in the DOE S&S Program are 
defined in the DOE PIR tool located at https://pir.doe.gov/. In addition to these 
definitions, the following are provided: 
a. Administrative Action. In the context of IOSCs, an administrative action refers to 
any decision (or final proposal) by the organization with official cognizance of an 
employee to take an adverse or disciplinary action against an employee as a result 
of an IOSC. This includes formal disciplinary actions taken to correct misconduct 
and enforce prescribed rules for behavior (e.g., requirements) such as reprimands 
and suspensions as well as removals, reassignments, furloughs, reductions in

--- page 80 ---
Attachment 6 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 470.1A 
Page 6-2  12-18-2024 
 
 
pay/grade, or loss of clearance. Also includes other actions without disciplinary 
consequences to formally document responsibility and culpability for an IOSC 
such as formally documented infractions or violations (e.g., using DOE F 5639.3, 
Report of Security Incident/Infraction, or equivalent). 
b. Authorized Person. A person who has a favorable determination of eligibility for 
access to classified information, has signed an approved nondisclosure agreement, 
and has a need-to-know for the specific classified information in the performance 
of official duties. 
c. C ompromise . A final determination that classified information is or was disclosed 
to one or more unauthorized individuals, or the information was outside of 
appropriate controls and cannot subsequently be placed back under appropriate 
controls (e.g., published by media, Unclassified Controlled Nuclear Information 
(UCNI) or classified information was provided to unauthorized individuals).  For 
the purposes of this Attachment, "compromise" includes an unauthorized 
dissemination of UCNI (i.e., UCNI is intentionally or negligently transferred to an 
unauthorized individual). Compromises of classified information are reported as 
Category A SI IOSCs.  Compromises of UCNI are reported as Category B SI 
IOSCs. 
d. C ompromise Did Not Occur. A final determination that there is no possibility of 
compromise.  Noncompliances involving classified information where 
compromise did not occur are typically reported as Category B PI IOSCs. 
e. C ontrolled Unclassified Information (CUI) . CUI is information the Government 
creates or possesses, or that an entity creates or possesses for or on behalf of the 
Government, that a law, regulation, or government-wide policy requires or 
permits an agency to handle using safeguarding or dissemination controls. CUI 
does not include classified information or information a non-executive branch 
entity possesses and maintains in its own systems that did not come from, or was 
not created or possessed by or for, an executive branch agency or an entity acting 
for an agency. 
f. D isposition. Refers to the final determination of a preliminary inquiry whether a 
potential IOSC (PIOSC) is reportable as an IOSC or does not meet IOSC 
reporting requirements (i.e., non-IOSC). 
g. D iversion  (of nuclear material). The diversion of nuclear material refers to the 
unauthorized removal of nuclear material from its approved or authorized 
location. 
h. G ross Negligence. An action or inaction contrary to requirements or procedures 
which demonstrates such inattention and carelessness as to appear reckless or 
intentional. A reasonable person would recognize that the act (or omission) has a 
high probability of resulting in the loss or compromise of DOE security assets. 
For example, a person circumvents prescribed procedures with full knowledge of 
the security requirements and associated penalties but does so for personal
