--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov Office of Environment, Health, Safety and Security  
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C.  
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT:  MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FOR DOE 
NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. PURPOSE.  Federal Regulations (CFR) § 830.204(b)(5) for maintenance and the reliable 
performance of structures, systems, and components (SSCs) that are part of the safety 
basis required by 10 CFR § 830.202, Safety Basis, at Hazard Category 1, 2 and 3 
Department of Energy (DOE) nuclear facilities. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 433.1B, Maintenance Management Program for 
DOE Nuclear Facilities, dated March 12, 2013.  Cancellation of a directive does not, by 
itself, modify or otherwise affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with 
the Directive.  Contractor Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated 
into a contract remain in effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the 
contract or regulatory commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are 
no longer applicable or substitute a new set of requirements. 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Applicability.  This Order applies to all DOE elements involved in 
the maintenance of DOE Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities and 
automatically applies to DOE elements created after it is issued.  This includes 
both government-owned and government-operated (GOGO) and 
government-owned and contractor-operated (GOCO) nuclear facilities. 
The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) must 
ensure that NNSA employees comply with their respective responsibilities under 
this Directive.  Nothing in this Directive will be construed to interfere with the 
NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of Public Law 
(P.L.) 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, to 
establish Administration-specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
b. DOE Contractors.  Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c., the 
CRD, Attachment 1, sets forth requirements of this Order that will apply to 
contracts that include the CRD.  The CRD requirements apply to all contractors 
responsible for managing and maintaining DOE-owned or -leased Hazard 
Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities.  Contractors must comply with the 
requirements listed in the CRD to the extent set forth in their contracts. 
DOE O 433.1C

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 433.1C 
 08-05-2026 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions for DOE O 433.1C.  Equivalencies and exemptions to 
this Order are processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1, Departmental 
Directives Program, current version.  Concurrence by the Central Technical 
Authority (CTA) or designee is required for both exemptions and equivalencies to 
this Order for nuclear facilities. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at 50 U.S.C. §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, 
and 2511, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, and to ensure consistency 
through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the 
Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and 
oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this Directive for 
activities under the Director’s cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  This Order does not apply to those portions of the 
nuclear facility maintenance programs that are subject to regulation by 
other federal agencies such as the United States (U.S.) Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission. 
(3) Exemption.  This Order does not apply to the Bonneville Power 
Administration (BPA), in accordance with S1-DEL-BPA1-2016, 
Delegation to the Administrator and Chief Executive Officer of 
Bonneville Power Administration, dated August 12, 2016, to the BPA 
Administrator and Chief Executive Officer. 
4. REQUIREMENTS.  DOE Guide (G) 433.1-1, Nuclear Facility Maintenance 
Management Program Guide for Use with DOE O 433.1, current version, provides 
acceptable examples of approaches for meeting the requirements of this Order.  
DOE G 433.1-1 references federal regulations, DOE Directives, and industry best 
practices using a graded approach regarding implementation of requirements for 
maintaining DOE-owned government property.  Graded approach is defined in 
10 CFR § 830.3, Definitions, and guidance for applying it is provided in DOE G 433.1-1. 
a. All Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 nuclear facilities, as defined in DOE-Standard 
(STD)-1027-2018, Chg. 1, dated January 2019, must conduct all maintenance of 
SSCs that are part of the safety basis in compliance with a Nuclear Maintenance 
Management Program (NMMP) through tailored application (e.g., graded 
approach) of the requirements. 
b. NMMPs for GOCO facilities must demonstrate compliance with the requirements 
contained in the CRD of this Order (Attachment 1).  NMMPs for GOGO facilities 
must demonstrate compliance with the requirements contained in Attachment 2.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 433.1C 3 
08-05-2026 
c. Changes to NMMPs must be reviewed under the unreviewed safety question 
(USQ) process to ensure that SSCs are maintained and operated within the 
approved safety basis, as required by 10 CFR § 830, Subpart B, Safety Basis 
Requirements.  Changes that would result in a USQ must be approved prior to the 
change taking effect. 
d. Assessments of NMMP implementation should be conducted in accordance with 
DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current 
version, to evaluate whether all CRD requirements are appropriately 
implemented. Periodic self-assessments in accordance with DOE O 226.1 should 
be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of oversight of NMMPs. 
e. A single maintenance program may be used to address the requirements of this 
Order and the requirements of DOE O 430.1, Real Property Asset Management, 
current version. 
f. Full implementation of the requirements in this Order must be accomplished 
within 1 year of its issuance, unless a different implementation schedule is 
approved by the Secretarial Officer with concurrence of the CTAs. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Secretarial Officers, including NNSA Administrator and Deputy Administrator 
for Defense Programs. 
(1) Ensure that the requirements of this Order are implemented for facilities, 
activities, or programs under their cognizance. 
(2) For GOGO activities under their cognizance, approve or designate the 
approval authority for NMMP documentation prepared in accordance with 
the CRD (Attachment 1). 
(3) Ensure that contractors conduct maintenance of SSCs in accordance with a 
DOE/NNSA-approved NMMP. 
(4) Review and approve requests for equivalencies and exemptions from 
requirements of this Order after resolving comments in accordance with 
DOE O 251.1, current version. 
(5) Ensure that Field Office Managers notify Contracting Officers when 
contracts are affected by this Order. 
b. Central Technical Authorities. 
(1) Concur with decisions regarding applicability of CRDs related to this 
Order, in accordance with DOE O 410.1, Central Technical Authority 
Responsibilities Regarding Nuclear Safety Requirements, current version.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 433.1C 
 08-05-2026 
(2) Concur with exemptions and equivalencies to this Order for 
nuclear facilities. 
c. Field Office Managers (including NNSA). 
(1) Ensure that maintenance activities and programs at Hazard Category 1, 2, 
and 3 nuclear facilities under their purview are conducted in compliance 
with the requirements of this Order. 
(2) Ensure that sufficient resources are requested to meet the requirements of 
this Order and to ensure that safety SSCs are sufficiently maintained to 
perform their assigned safety function. 
(3) Ensure that the requirements of this Order are incorporated into contracts, 
subcontracts, and support services contracts for Hazard Category 1, 2, and 
3 nuclear facilities, as appropriate. 
(4) Notify Contracting Officers when contracts are affected by this Order. 
(5) Review and approve NMMP program description documentation that 
demonstrates compliance with the CRD, Attachment 1, with Specific 
Requirements found in the sources listed in section 7, below. 
(6) Conduct comprehensive self-assessments and assessments of contractor 
maintenance management programs as specified in section 4. 
d. Contracting Officers. 
(1) For all applicable contracts and upon notification that a site/facility 
management contract is affected by this Order, the Contracting Officers 
shall incorporate the requirements into the affected contract(s) via the 
“Laws, Regulations, and DOE Directives” clause of the contract, or 
through negotiation and modification, as appropriate. 
6. INVOKED STANDARDS.  This Order does not invoke any DOE technical standards or 
industry standards as required methods. Any technical standard or industry standard that 
is mentioned in or referenced by this Order is not invoked by this Order. Note: 
DOE 251.1D, Appendix J, provides a definition for “invoked technical standard.” 
7. REFERENCES. 
a. Title XXXII, National Nuclear Security Administration Act, of P.L. 106-65, 
as amended, established a separately organized agency within the Department 
of Energy. 
b. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management; Subpart A, “Quality 
Assurance Requirements.”

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 433.1C 5 
08-05-2026 
c. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management; Subpart B, “Safety 
Basis Requirements.” 
d. 10 CFR § 835, Occupational Radiation Protection. 
e. 10 CFR § 850, Chronic Beryllium Disease Prevention Program. 
f. 10 CFR § 851, Worker Safety and Health Program. 
g. 48 CFR § 970.5223-1, “Integration of Environment, Safety and Health into Work 
Planning and Execution.” 
h. Executive Order 12344, “Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program.” 
i. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, 
current version. 
j. DOE O 227.1, Independent Oversight Program, current version. 
k. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version. 
l. DOE O 410.1, Central Technical Authority Responsibilities Regarding Nuclear 
Safety Requirements, current version. 
m. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version. 
n. DOE O 420.1, Facility Safety, current version. 
o. DOE O 422.1, Conduct of Operations, current version. 
p. DOE O 426.2, Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification 
Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities, current version. 
q. DOE G 424.1-1, Implementation Guide for Use in Addressing Unreviewed Safety 
Question Requirements, current version. 
r. DOE O 430.1, Real Property Asset Management, current version. 
s. DOE G 433.1-1, Nuclear Facility Maintenance Management Program Guide for 
Use with DOE O 433.1B, current version. 
t. DOE O 440.1, Worker Protection Program for DOE (Including the National 
Nuclear Security Administration) Federal Employees, current version. 
u. DOE G 450.4-1, Integrated Safety Management System Guide, current version. 
v. DOE O 450.2, Integrated Safety Management, current version.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 433.1C 
 08-05-2026 
w. DOE O 458.1, Radiation Protection of the Public and the Environment, current 
version. 
x. DOE-STD-1027-2018, Chg 1, Hazard Categorization of DOE Nuclear Facilities, 
dated January 2019. 
8. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Directive should be addressed to the Office of 
Nuclear Safety, Quality Assurance and Environment at 202-586-5680. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 433.1C Attachment 1 – CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT 
DOE O 433.1C, MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FOR 
DOE NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
Contractors at Hazard Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities must comply with the requirements 
listed in this Contractor Requirements Document (CRD) to the extent set forth in their contracts.  
Maintenance Management Program requirements applicable to this CRD are provided in 
Attachment 2.  Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for 
complying with the requirements of this CRD and flowing down CRD requirements to 
subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure contractor compliance. 
The provisions of this CRD apply to Department of Energy (DOE) and National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA) contractors.

--- page 8 ---
DOE O 433.1C Attachment 2 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-1 
ATTACHMENT 2 
MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS FOR DOE 
NUCLEAR FACILITIES 
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Federal and contractor organizations responsible for Hazard Category 1, 2, or 3 
nuclear facilities, as defined by Department of Energy (DOE) Standard (STD) 
1027-2018 Chg1, Hazard Categorization of DOE Nuclear Facilities, dated 
January 2019, must develop and implement a Nuclear Maintenance Management 
Program (NMMP) through tailored application (e.g., graded approach) of the 
Specific Requirements in this Attachment.  The definition of graded approach is 
provided in Title 10 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 830.3, Definitions.  
The NMMP must describe the Safety Management Program for maintenance and 
the reliable performance of structures, systems and components (SSCs) that are 
part of the safety basis at Hazard Category 1, 2 and 3 DOE nuclear facilities. 
b. Federal and contractor organizations must conduct all maintenance of SSCs that 
are part of the safety basis in compliance with an approved NMMP. 
c. Federal and contractor organizations must ensure that equivalencies and 
exemptions from the Maintenance Management Program elements of this 
Attachment are identified, formally documented with supporting justification, 
and approved. 
d. Federal and contractor organizations must implement the NMMP through federal 
or contractor-approved documents, respectively. 
e. Federal and contractor organizations must submit NMMP description 
documentation to DOE/NNSA for review prior to the startup of new Hazard 
Category 1, 2, and 3 nuclear facilities.  NMMP description documentation must 
be, at a minimum, an applicability matrix or a combination of multiple 
documents.  The following elements must be covered: 
(1) Correlation of the Specific Requirements in this Attachment to the 
applicable facilities; 
(2) Correlation of the implementing documents (procedures, work 
instructions, etc.) to the Specific Requirements in this Attachment; and 
(3) Documentation of the basis for applying a graded approach, if applicable. 
f. Federal and contractor organizations must conduct assessments of NMMP 
implementation, in accordance with DOE Policy (P) 226.1, Implementation of 
Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current version and 10 CFR § 830, 
Nuclear Safety Management, Subpart A, Quality Assurance Requirements.

--- page 9 ---
Attachment 2 – Federal Employees and Contractors DOE O 433.1C 
Page 2-2 08-05-2026 
g. Federal and contractor organizations must ensure that NMMPs are identified in 
the applicable documented safety analysis in accordance with 10 CFR § 830.204, 
Documented Safety Analysis. 
h. Federal and contractor organizations must review proposed changes to the 
NMMP, which could affect the performance of safety SSCs, as part of the 
ongoing unreviewed safety question (USQ) process.  This review is intended to 
evaluate whether safety SSCs are maintained and operated within the approved 
safety basis, as required by 10 CFR § 830.203, Unreviewed Safety Question 
Process.  Changes that would result in a positive USQ must be submitted to the 
Secretarial Officer for approval prior to the change taking effect. 
2. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.  The NMMP must clearly address the following: 
a. The NMMP must be integrated with applicable federal regulations and DOE 
Directives governing nuclear safety, quality assurance, worker protection, 
radiation protection, conduct of operations, and integrated safety management.  
Integration requirements are determined through the facility’s safety 
basis documentation. 
Implementation shall be integrated with applicable documents identified in 
section 7, References. 
b. Maintenance Organization and Administration.  The management structure that 
applies sufficient resources (e.g., oversight and independent assessment, 
management involvement, funding, assignment of personnel roles and 
responsibilities, facilities, tools, and equipment) necessary to support the 
requirements described in this Attachment and ensure integration with 
other programs. 
c. Planning, Scheduling, and Coordination of Maintenance.  The process for 
planning, scheduling, coordination, and control of maintenance activities, and 
properly emphasizing equipment availability.  The process must describe the 
application of a System Engineer Program in the planning and execution of 
maintenance activities. 
d. Types of Maintenance.  The process for utilization of appropriate types of 
maintenance (e.g., preventive maintenance, predictive maintenance, reliability-
centered maintenance, surveillance and testing, and corrective maintenance) to 
provide for safe, efficient, and reliable operation of safety SSCs. 
e. Maintenance Procedures.  The process for developing and implementing 
documented and approved work instructions for work on safety SSCs (e.g., work 
packages, procedures, work instructions, and drawings). 
f. Training and Qualification.  The Training and Qualification Program for 
maintenance positions specified in DOE O 426.2, Personnel Selection, Training, 
Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities, 
current version.

--- page 10 ---
DOE O 433.1C Attachment 2 – Fede ral Employees and Contractors 
08-05-2026 Page 2-3 
g. Configuration Management.  The incorporation of the Configuration Management 
Program to control approved modifications and to prevent unauthorized 
modifications to safety SSCs. 
h. Suspect and Counterfeit Items. The incorporation of the process to prevent the use 
of suspect and counterfeit items into maintenance procedures and 
work instructions. 
i. Maintenance Tool and Equipment Control.  The process for control of 
maintenance tools including calibration of measuring and test equipment. 
j. Maintenance History.  The process for developing and maintaining documented 
and retrievable maintenance history (e.g., cost data, system availability data, and 
failure data) to support work planning, performance trending, analysis of 
problems to determine root causes of unplanned occurrences related to 
maintenance, and continuous program improvement.  Tracking and trending of 
deferred maintenance on safety SSCs, including aging of deferred items and risk 
significance, to support resource planning and priority setting. 
k. Performance Measures.  Establishment and use of performance measures to assess 
NMMP effectiveness, identify adverse trends, and drive corrective action. 
l. Facility Condition Inspection. The process for conducting and implementing 
routine assessment of facilities to identify issues related to operability, 
and reliability. 
m. Post-Maintenance Testing.  The process for conducting post-maintenance testing 
to verify that safety SSCs can perform their intended function when returned 
to service.
