--- page 1 ---
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: INITIATED BY: 
www.directives.doe.gov  Office of Enterprise Assessments 
U.S. Department of Energy ORDER 
 Washington, D.C. 
Approved: 08-05-2026 
 
SUBJECT: INDEPENDENT OVERSIGHT PROGRAM 
1. PURPOSE.  To prescribe the requirements and responsibilities for the Department of 
Energy (DOE) Independent Oversight Program.  The DOE Independent Oversight 
Program is implemented by the Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA).  EA is an 
independent office within DOE in that it has no line management or policy-making 
responsibilities or authorities.  The Independent Oversight Program comprises one 
element of DOE’s multifaceted approach to oversight, as described in DOE P 226.2, 
Policy for Federal Oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems.  Effective oversight, 
including independent oversight of DOE federal and contractor operations, is an integral 
part of the Department’s responsibility as a self-regulating agency to provide assurance of 
its safety and security posture to its leadership, its workers, and the public.  The 
Independent Oversight Program is designed to enhance without duplicating DOE safety 
and security programs by providing the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Energy, Under 
Secretaries of Energy, other DOE managers, senior contractor managers, Congress, and 
other stakeholders with an independent evaluation of the adequacy of DOE policy and 
requirements, and the effectiveness of DOE and contractor line management performance 
and risk management in safety and security and other critical functions as directed by the 
Secretary.  The requirements in this directive are designed to ensure that the Independent 
Oversight Program is implemented in a transparent, efficient, and constructive manner to 
support the safe and secure accomplishment of DOE’s missions. 
The Independent Oversight Program will operate in a manner to avoid unnecessary 
duplication of oversight activities.  EA shall leverage existing assessments, reviews, and 
performance information to the maximum extent practicable and avoid repeating 
oversight recently performed or planned for performance in the near future.  To ensure 
operational efficiency and avoid duplication of resources/cost, the Independent Oversight 
Program shall not duplicate any effort which is subject to Contractor Assurance Systems, 
as described in DOE P 226.2. 
2. CANCELS/SUPERSEDES.  DOE O 227.1, Independent Oversight Program, dated 
August 30, 2011.  Cancellation of a directive does not, by itself, modify or otherwise 
affect any contractual or regulatory obligation to comply with the directive.  Contractor 
Requirements Documents (CRDs) that have been incorporated into a contract remain in 
effect throughout the term of the contract unless and until the contract or regulatory 
commitment is modified to either eliminate requirements that are no longer applicable or 
substitute a new set of requirements. 
DOE O 227.1B

--- page 2 ---
2 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
3. APPLICABILITY. 
a. Departmental Elements.  Except as noted in paragraph 3.c., this Order applies to 
all DOE elements, including the National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA). 
The NNSA Administrator must assure that NNSA employees comply with their 
responsibilities under this directive.  Nothing in this directive will be construed to 
interfere with the NNSA Administrator’s authority under section 3212(d) of 
Public Law 106-65, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, to 
establish Administration specific policies, unless disapproved by the Secretary. 
b. DOE Contractors.  Except for the equivalencies/exemptions in paragraph 3.c, the 
CRD provided in Attachment 1 sets forth requirements of this Order that apply to 
contracts that include the CRD. 
The CRD or its requirements must be included in: 
(1) All DOE site/facility management and operating contracts. 
(2) DOE contracts that contain the clauses “Security requirements” (48 CFR 
§ 952.204-2); “Classification/Declassification” (48 CFR § 952.204-70); 
“Counterintelligence” (48 CFR § 970.5204-1); and/or “Integration of 
environment, safety and health into work planning and execution” 
(48 CFR § 970.5223-1). 
c. Equivalencies/Exemptions.  Equivalencies and exemptions to this Order are 
processed in accordance with DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, 
current version. 
(1) Equivalency.  In accordance with the responsibilities and authorities 
assigned by Executive Order 12344, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, 
codified at 50 U.S.C. §§ 2406, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, 
and 2511, Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, and to ensure consistency 
through the joint Navy/DOE Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program, the 
Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors (Director) will implement and 
oversee requirements and practices pertaining to this directive for 
activities under the Director’s cognizance, as deemed appropriate. 
(2) Exemption.  Pursuant to Executive Order 12333, United States 
Intelligence Activities, with respect to intelligence-related activities of the 
Director, Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, this Order applies 
only to information protection (including related physical security 
measures) and cybersecurity measures.

--- page 3 ---
DOE O 227.1B  3 
08-05-2026 
4. REQUIREMENTS. 
a. Independent Oversight Activities. 
(1) EA must conduct independent evaluations (hereafter referred to as 
Independent Oversight appraisals) of DOE sites, facilities, nuclear design 
and construction projects, organizations (including DOE Headquarters), 
and operations to evaluate the effectiveness of DOE and contractor line 
management performance and risk management in implementing and 
overseeing safety (nuclear and industrial) and security (cyber and physical) 
programs, including line oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems (see 
DOE Order 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight 
Policy, current version).  EA must also evaluate the adequacy of DOE 
policy, and other critical functions when directed by the Secretary. 
(2) EA must evaluate performance and management of safety and security 
risks against applicable laws, statutes, rules, executive orders, national 
standards, DOE directives, DOE-approved plans and program documents 
(e.g., security plans, emergency plans, authorization basis documents, 
worker safety and health programs, quality assurance program plans), 
site-specific procedures, and contractual requirements.  This includes 
requirements promulgated by Program Secretarial Officers and formally 
authorized for use by organizations under their cognizance. 
(3) EA must use a formal documented process to manage and conduct 
Independent Oversight appraisals that are published and accessible to DOE 
employees.  This process is provided in the Independent Oversight 
Appraisal Process Protocols available at 
http://energy.gov/ea/services/assessments. 
(4) Independent Oversight appraisals must be prioritized on areas of greatest 
potential risks and implemented in a manner that supports DOE line 
management in accomplishing its line management oversight and 
achieving DOE mission objectives safely and securely.  Higher priority 
and greater emphasis is placed on conducting Independent Oversight 
appraisals of high consequence activities, such as nuclear project design, 
construction and commissioning; high hazard nuclear operations; 
protection of high value security assets (e.g., Category I quantities of 
special nuclear material and classified information assets, including 
special access programs, Sensitive Compartmented Information, and 
Restricted Data Sigma Categories, such as 14, 15, 18, and 20); DOE 
systems and assets that are critical infrastructure as defined by Presidential 
Policy Directive/PPD-21, Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience; 
systems or programs that can have widespread impacts (e.g., 
interconnected computer networks); and Independent Oversight appraisals 
required by other DOE directives.

--- page 4 ---
4 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
Other areas of consideration for Independent Oversight appraisals are 
organizations the performance of which may present significant risk (e.g., 
less-than-expected safety or security performance records and/or serious 
or recurring incidents or violations of requirements). 
(5) Persons who perform Independent Oversight appraisals must be 
technically qualified and knowledgeable in the areas they assess. 
(6) EA will encourage managers from the line organization subject to an 
appraisal to observe appraisal activities.  EA will encourage and 
accommodate appraisal augmentees from other organizations whenever 
feasible (see the Independent Oversight Appraisal Process Protocols). 
b. Licensed DOE Facilities or Activities.  Independent Oversight appraisal activities 
for DOE facilities or activities licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
must, except where excluded by law or DOE policy, be structured to minimize or 
eliminate duplication of oversight efforts while ensuring DOE safety and security 
programs0F
1 and associated facilities are independently evaluated.  Accordingly, the 
scheduling of independent oversight activities must take into account the 
inspection and assessment activities of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
c. Appraisal Planning. 
(1) Independent Oversight appraisal activities must be coordinated with 
affected DOE line management and staff offices to promote efficient and 
effective use of resources.  EA appraisal schedules will take into 
consideration Program Office and Field Element assessment plans and 
schedules.  Disagreements regarding scheduling appraisals that cannot be 
resolved between the cognizant EA Office Director and cognizant 
manager must be elevated through organizational management levels up to 
and including the Deputy Secretary for resolution. 
(2) EA shall utilize, to the maximum extent practicable, existing planned, 
completed, and approved management assessments, Contractor Assurance 
System assessments, external regulatory reviews, accreditation reviews, 
peer reviews, and other oversight activities when determining the need, 
scope, and depth of Independent Oversight appraisals.  EA will not 
duplicate assessment topics or activities performed at/by federal and 
contractor facilities within a 24-month window (i.e., 12 months prior to 
EA oversight and/or planned in 12 months following EA oversight, or 
subject to Contractor Assurance Systems) as described in DOE P 226.2. 
 
1  Throughout this directive, safety and security programs means (1) programs for the protection of the public, the 
environment, and worker health and safety; and (2) programs for the protection of security assets to include 
special nuclear materials and classified and sensitive unclassified information in all forms.  This includes 
cybersecurity and emergency management programs.

--- page 5 ---
DOE O 227.1B  5 
08-05-2026 
(3) Prior to approving an appraisal plan, EA shall document consideration of 
existing oversight activities, including Contractor Assurance System 
assessments, management assessments, Office of Inspector General 
reviews, Government Accountability Office reviews, Defense Nuclear 
Facilities Safety Board reviews, Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
inspections, and other applicable federal or external assessments and, if 
there exists overlap/duplication with such other oversight activities, limit 
the scope of the appraisal plan to addressing material concerns with the 
adequacy of the prior or overlapping assessments.  Where adequate 
assessment coverage already exists, EA shall adjust the appraisal plan to 
avoid duplication of such other efforts, such as if subject to Contractor 
Assurance Systems, as described in DOE P 226.2. 
(4) EA will issue an appraisal plan before each appraisal that communicates 
the scope, schedule, and team composition for the appraisal to the line 
management of the organization subject to the appraisal, to include 
representatives of the applicable Program Office and Field Element.  In 
some cases, an appraisal plan may cover a series of related appraisals at a 
site or similar appraisals to be conducted at multiple sites.  EA must notify 
the cognizant DOE line management if circumstances or conditions are 
identified that necessitate deviating from the documented scope of the 
appraisal and coordinate with line management to accommodate the 
revised scope. 
(5) Upon EA request, DOE and contractor management must provide access 
to facilities, managers and staff, and documents or other data.  EA will 
tailor document requests to the specific information needed to support the 
established scope of the appraisal.  Organizations subject to appraisals 
must identify access requirements (e.g., security, training, and personal 
protective equipment) with sufficient lead time to allow Independent 
Oversight personnel to gain prompt access to sites, facilities, and/or 
networks at the onset of an appraisal. 
(6) EA must assure that appraisal team members have no conflict of interest or 
appearance of conflict of interest with the subjects they review. 
(7) Select Independent Oversight appraisal activities require federal and 
contractor representatives to serve as trusted agents.  Trusted agents assist 
in planning and conducting performance tests and must accomplish this 
without divulging or compromising sensitive testing information.  The 
number of trusted agents representing the site or organization must be kept 
to the absolute minimum, and trusted agents must have the authority to 
make decisions regarding testing details on behalf of their 
facility/organization.  To support safe and credible oversight activities, EA 
will coordinate performance test scenarios with appropriate trusted agents.  
For safeguards and security performance tests, this will include 
coordination with the Officially Designated Federal Security Authority 
(ODFSA) or the authority’s designee.

--- page 6 ---
6 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
(8) EA’s performance test scenarios for force-on-force security exercises 
support its independent assessment of the adequacy of a site’s protection 
strategy and response plan execution and are based upon the Department’s 
threat policy.  EA will routinely conduct performance testing using 
scenarios representing baseline adversary threat levels and capabilities 
against which possessing sites are expected to achieve high system 
effectiveness.  EA and ODFSA representatives will work collaboratively 
to plan safe and operationally credible security exercises that achieve the 
established test objectives and minimize exercise artificialities.  Safety 
concerns will be resolved before a security exercise is performed.  ODFSA 
disagreements with the credibility of EA performance test scenarios (both 
at and above baseline threat levels and capabilities) must be elevated 
through organizational management levels (up to the Deputy Secretary if 
necessary) until resolution is obtained.  EA oversight reports will clearly 
delineate the nature of each performance test conducted. 
(9) Most Independent Oversight appraisals are announced in advance to the 
responsible DOE and contractor organization to promote effective 
coordination and efficient resource utilization.  Where EA determines that 
unannounced appraisals are necessary to evaluate safety and security 
performance (e.g., cybersecurity penetration testing, limited notice 
performance testing of critical physical and information security controls), 
trusted agents from responsible DOE Program Offices and Field Elements 
must be consulted in advance and kept informed as the unannounced 
appraisal is conducted.  Safety and security considerations are paramount 
in planning and conducting unannounced appraisals. 
d. Conduct of Appraisals. 
(1) The EA appraisal team leader must provide informal written (preferable) 
or verbal information on preliminary observations from the appraisal to 
line management’s designee at the conclusion of onsite data-collection 
activities. 
(2) EA must document all of its Independent Oversight appraisals.  The 
appraisal documentation must identify the overall effectiveness of the 
DOE and/or contractor organization in managing the appraised functions 
and any findings that represent risks to the mission and warrant a high 
level of management attention.  EA appraisal documents may also list 
specific implementation deficiencies, suggested opportunities for 
improvement to assist cognizant managers in improving programs and 
operations, any identified best practices that could help other DOE 
organizations solve challenging problems, and recommendations for 
senior line management’s consideration to improve program or 
management effectiveness (see Appendix A, Definitions).  Findings and 
deficiencies must reference applicable requirements to facilitate 
disposition by the site’s or program’s issues management system.

--- page 7 ---
DOE O 227.1B  7 
08-05-2026 
Appraisals may also identify ratings (e.g., effective performance, needs 
improvement, or significant weakness) where appropriate to convey the 
appraisal results. 
(3) The factual accuracy of appraisal results must be verified by the cognizant 
DOE management responsible for the program or activity.  For major 
appraisals (e.g., multitopic inspections), the results will be provided to the 
cognizant DOE Field Element and Program Office for factual accuracy 
review.  Disagreements regarding the factual accuracy of the appraisal 
results or findings that cannot be resolved between the cognizant EA 
Office Director and the cognizant manager must be elevated through 
organizational management levels, up to and including the Deputy 
Secretary, for resolution and must consider any relevant interpretation of 
the requirements issued by the cognizant Office of Primary Interest (OPI) 
for the directive. 
(4) For major Independent Oversight appraisals, EA must provide the 
cognizant Program Secretarial Officer the opportunity to submit a written 
management response to the conclusions and any recommendations 
included in the final draft appraisal report.  If provided, EA will reflect this 
response in an appendix to the final appraisal report. 
(5) EA must coordinate with the affected cognizant Program Secretarial 
Officers, DOE Field Elements, and Under Secretaries before briefing other 
DOE personnel on appraisal results.  EA must coordinate with the affected 
DOE organizations and the Departmental Representative to the Defense 
Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (DNFSB) before briefing the DNFSB.  In 
both situations, the secretarial officer and/or DOE Field Element manager 
must be offered the opportunity to address the appraisal outcomes, which 
may be accomplished verbally and/or in writing. 
e. Response to Major Vulnerabilities or Imminent Danger. 
(1) EA personnel must notify the cognizant DOE manager verbally as soon as 
possible and provide written notification within 24 hours when appraisal 
activities indicate either of the following conditions: 
(a) An imminent danger or condition that presents an unacceptable 
immediate risk to workers, public health, or the environment, or 
(b) A major vulnerability (e.g., unacceptable risk of special nuclear 
material theft or diversion, radiological or industrial sabotage, 
espionage, or significant compromise of classified information). 
(2) When notified of either of the above conditions, cognizant DOE 
management must take actions to mitigate the short- and long-term risk 
and must notify the Program Secretarial Officer within 5 working days of 
actions taken and any compensatory measures planned.

--- page 8 ---
8 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
(3) If the cognizant DOE management disagrees with EA’s characterization of 
the severity of the identified condition or the need for prompt action, this 
must immediately be brought to the attention of the Program Secretarial 
Officer or Under Secretary as applicable, and EA Director for resolution. 
f. Corrective Actions. 
(1) Cognizant DOE managers must use site- and program-specific issues 
management processes and systems developed in accordance with 
DOE O 226.1 and Quality Assurance Programs established to meet the 
requirements of DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version, and 
10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management, to manage and approve 
corrective action plans and track them to completion.  Findings and other 
deficiencies identified in Independent Oversight appraisal reports are 
managed in accordance with DOE O 226.1 processes. 
(2) When requested by the cognizant DOE manager, EA may review the 
adequacy of proposed corrective action plans developed in response to 
appraisal results and provide comments for consideration. 
(3) Cognizant DOE managers must provide EA with information on 
corrective actions related to major vulnerabilities or imminent danger 
regarding their organization, sites, and/or contractor activities 
when requested. 
5. RESPONSIBILITIES. 
a. Program Secretarial Officers, including the NNSA Administrator.1F
2 
(1) Where appropriate, review and provide comments on the factual accuracy 
of draft appraisal reports. 
(2) Take timely and appropriate action to address findings identified in 
Independent Oversight appraisal reports and approve corrective action 
plans as appropriate.  Address other deficiencies identified in Independent 
Oversight appraisal reports in accordance with established issues 
management processes (DOE O 226.1, current version) and quality 
assurance programs (DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version). 
(3) Provide EA with requested documentation, points of contact, and access to 
sites, facilities, networks, and operations in support of appraisal activities. 
 
2  In most cases, the Program Secretarial Officer is also the lead Program Secretarial Officer for a site or facility.  If 
the Program Secretarial Officer is not also the lead Program Secretarial Officer, the Program Secretarial Officer 
is responsible for coordinating with the lead Program Secretarial Officer on any findings that require input or 
action from the lead Program Secretarial Officer.

--- page 9 ---
DOE O 227.1B  9 
08-05-2026 
(4) Work with the EA Director to resolve disagreements on appraisal 
schedules, appraisal results, or findings that are unable to be resolved at 
lower organizational levels.  Escalate those issues to the Deputy Secretary, 
if necessary, to achieve resolution. 
b. Director, Office of Enterprise Assessments. 
(1) Direct and manage the safety and security Independent Oversight Program. 
(2) Develop and maintain documents that describe the safety and security 
Independent Oversight Program and implementing methods. 
(3) Ensure that senior EA management oversight is provided for all appraisal 
planning, conduct, and reporting. 
(4) Determine the appropriate distribution of appraisal reports, to include 
applicable Program Office representatives and Heads of Field Elements, 
and lessons learned information resulting from appraisals. 
(5) Provide updates, as appropriate, on the status of appraisals to the 
Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Program Secretarial 
Officers, and applicable OPIs for DOE directives. 
(6) Brief senior DOE officials, including the NNSA Administrator, Under 
Secretaries, Program Secretarial Officers, OPI managers, Heads of Field 
Elements, and senior representatives of affected contractors on the results 
of appraisal activities where appropriate. 
(7) Notify the DOE Inspector General when appraisal activities identify 
concerns involving potential criminal activities and/or waste, fraud, 
and abuse. 
(8) Work with Program Secretarial Officers to resolve disagreements on 
appraisal schedules, appraisal results, or findings that are unable to be 
resolved at lower organizational levels.  Escalate those issues to the 
Deputy Secretary, if necessary, to achieve resolution. 
(9) Direct and manage the National Training Center (NTC) to ensure lessons 
learned from Independent Oversight activities are integrated into NTC 
safety and security training courses. 
(10) Notify the applicable Program Secretarial Officer when findings identified 
by EA have not been resolved effectively or in a timely manner.

--- page 10 ---
10 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
c. Directors, Office of Safeguards and Security Assessments; Office of Cyber 
Assessments; and Office of Environment, Safety and Health Assessments. 
(1) Coordinate the scheduling, notification, and planning of appraisal 
activities with appropriate Program Secretarial Officers and/or Heads of 
Field Elements. 
(2) Ensure that appraisal teams are composed of an appropriate number of 
qualified personnel and are effectively supervised during planning, 
conduct, and reporting of appraisal results. 
(3) Coordinate with the applicable OPIs to ensure accurate understanding of 
requirements related to safety and security findings and deficiencies 
identified during appraisals. 
(4) Formally notify the applicable OPI when findings relating to DOE policy 
or DOE directives are identified. 
(5) Post the title and date of all final appraisal reports on the appropriate EA 
website.  Post a copy of final appraisal reports that do not contain or reveal 
classified or controlled unclassified information. 
d. Director, Office of Cyber Assessments. 
(1) In addition to other cybersecurity appraisal activities, conduct appraisals 
of DOE national security systems, including national security systems 
processing intelligence information, to meet the annual independent 
evaluation requirements of the Federal Information Security 
Management Act. 
(2) Coordinate with the Office of the Chief Information Officer, as the OPI, 
and provide annual briefings to the DOE Cyber Council regarding the 
tracking of findings and resolution of issues across the enterprise. 
e. Heads of Field Elements.2F
3 
(1) Identify contracts to which the CRD requirements should apply and notify 
the cognizant contracting officers. 
(2) Review and resolve with EA the factual accuracy of draft appraisal reports. 
 
3  Operations offices, service centers, site offices, field offices, area offices, production offices, project 
management offices, government-owned government-operated facilities and regional offices of federally staffed 
laboratories that report directly to a DOE Headquarters office.

--- page 11 ---
DOE O 227.1B  11 
08-05-2026 
(3) Take timely and appropriate action to address the findings identified in 
Independent Oversight appraisal reports and approve corrective action 
plans as appropriate.  Address other deficiencies identified in Independent 
Oversight appraisal reports in accordance with established issues 
management processes (DOE O 226.1, current version) and quality 
assurance programs (DOE O 414.1, current version). 
(4) Provide EA with requested documentation, points of contact, and 
information concerning programs under their jurisdiction; ensure 
necessary support for appraisal activities, including access to sites, 
facilities, networks, and operations; and provide workspace for 
appraisal teams. 
f. Contracting Officers.  Incorporate the CRD into contracts in a timely fashion 
upon notification of its applicability.  If delegated the authority from the Head of 
the Field Element, the contracting officer may incorporate equivalent contract 
clauses or requirements into contracts in lieu of the CRD. 
g. Executive Secretary of the Special Access Program Oversight Committee.  Assist 
EA in obtaining access to special access programs as required to provide effective 
independent oversight of the overall DOE security program. 
h. Offices of Primary Interest (for DOE Directives). 
(1) As applicable, review and comment on the factual accuracy of draft 
Independent Oversight appraisal reports. 
(2) Evaluate findings regarding DOE policies, DOE directives, or activities of 
the OPI that are identified and transmitted by EA.  Document decisions on 
the need for corrective actions and track all actions to closure. 
(3) Provide clarification regarding requirements contained in DOE directives 
under their cognizance and issue written authoritative interpretations of 
such requirements when necessary or when requested by EA or a DOE 
line organization. 
6. REFERENCES. 
a. DOE P 226.2, Policy for Federal Oversight and Contractor Assurance Systems, 
current version, which establishes DOE’s expectations for implementation of a 
comprehensive and robust oversight process. 
b. DOE O 226.1, Implementation of Department of Energy Oversight Policy, current 
version, which establishes requirements and provides direction for implementing 
DOE P 226.2. 
c. DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version, which 
establishes requirements and responsibilities for implementing the DOE 
Directives Program.

--- page 12 ---
12 DOE O 227.1B 
 08-05-2026 
d. DOE O 414.1, Quality Assurance, current version, which establishes 
requirements for ensuring that DOE work meets requirements and expectations, 
and that quality improvement is effected through rigorous assessments and 
effective corrective actions. 
e. DOE O 470.4, Safeguards and Security Program, current version, which 
establishes requirements and responsibilities for managing DOE safeguards 
and security programs, including managing safeguards and security-related 
corrective actions. 
f. Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, Critical Infrastructure Security and 
Resilience, current version, which establishes a national policy and federal 
government roles and responsibilities for strengthening the security and resilience 
of United States critical infrastructure against physical and cyberthreats. 
g. 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management, which establishes requirements for 
the conduct of activities that may affect the safety of DOE nuclear facilities. 
7. DEFINITIONS.  See Appendix A. 
8. CONTACT.  Questions concerning this Order should be directed to the Office of 
Enterprise Assessments at (202) 586-0271. 
BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY: 
 
JAMES P. DANLY 
Deputy Secretary

--- page 13 ---
DOE O 227.1B Appendix A 
08-05-2026 Page A-1 
APPENDIX A 
DEFINITIONS 
1. Appraisal.  An Independent Oversight activity conducted by the Office of Enterprise 
Assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of line management performance and risk 
management or the adequacy of DOE policies and requirements. 
2. Best Practice.  A safety or security-related practice, technique, process, or program 
attribute observed during an appraisal that may merit consideration by other DOE and 
contractor organizations for implementation because it (1) has been demonstrated to 
substantially improve safety or security performance of a DOE operation; (2) represents 
or contributes to superior performance (beyond compliance); (3) solves a problem or 
reduces the risk of a condition or practice that affects multiple DOE sites or programs; or 
(4) provides an innovative approach or method to improve effectiveness or efficiency. 
3. Cognizant Manager.  The DOE field or Headquarters manager who is directly responsible 
for program management and direction and the development and implementation of 
corrective actions.  Cognizant managers may be line managers or managers of 
support organizations. 
4. Deficiency.  An inadequacy in the implementation of an applicable requirement or 
performance standard that is found during an appraisal.  Deficiencies may serve as the 
basis for one or more findings. 
5. Directives.  Defined in DOE O 251.1, Departmental Directives Program, current version. 
6. Findings.  Deficiencies that warrant a high level of attention on the part of management.  
If left uncorrected, findings could adversely affect the DOE mission, the environment, 
worker safety or health, the public, or national security.  Findings define the specific 
nature of the deficiency, whether it is localized or indicative of a systemic problem, and 
identify which organization is responsible for corrective actions. 
7. Imminent Danger:  Conditions or practices in the workplace where a danger exists which 
could reasonably be expected to cause death or serious physical harm either immediately 
or before the abatement of such danger, through normal procedures, would otherwise 
be required. 
8. Independent Oversight.  Refers exclusively to oversight by DOE Headquarters 
organizations that do not have line management responsibility for the activity.  Oversight 
by supporting organizations that are direct reports to line management is not considered 
DOE independent oversight.  Within DOE, the sole responsibility for independent 
oversight of safety and security programs resides with the Office of Enterprise 
Assessments, reporting directly to the Office of the Secretary of Energy. 
9. Line Management.  The unbroken chain of responsibility that extends from the Secretary 
of Energy to the Deputy Secretary, to the Secretarial Officers who set program policy and 
plans and develop assigned programs, to the program and Field Element Managers, and 
to the contractors and subcontractors who are responsible for execution of these 
programs.  It is distinct from DOE support organizations, such as the Office of

--- page 14 ---
Appendix A DOE O 227.1B 
Page A-2 08-05-2026 
Environment, Health, Safety and Security, Office of Management, and Office of the Chief 
Information Officer, which also have responsibilities and functions important to security 
and safety. 
10. Major Vulnerability.  A vulnerability which, if detected and exploited, could reasonably 
be expected to result in a successful attack causing serious damage to national security. 
11. Opportunities for Improvement.  Suggestions offered in Independent Oversight appraisal 
reports that may assist cognizant managers in improving programs and operations.  While 
they may identify potential solutions to findings and deficiencies identified in appraisal 
reports, they may also address other conditions observed during the appraisal process.  
Opportunities for improvement are provided only as recommendations for line 
management consideration; they do not require formal resolution by management through 
a corrective action process. 
12. Performance Testing.  Activities conducted to evaluate all or selected portions of safety 
and security systems, networks, or programs as they exist at the time of the test.  
Performance testing includes, but is not limited to, force-on-force exercises, tabletop 
exercises, knowledge tests, limited-scope performance tests, limited-notice performance 
tests, penetration testing, vulnerability scanning, continuous automated scanning, and 
cybersecurity “red teaming.”  Performance testing can be conducted as part of a 
scheduled appraisal activity (i.e., announced), or without prior knowledge of the entity 
being tested (i.e., unannounced). 
13. Policy.  The term “DOE policy” or “policy,” when used in lower case in this Order, is 
meant to be all inclusive of documents describing the philosophies, fundamental values, 
administration, requirements, and expectations for operation of the Department.  It 
includes but is not limited to DOE policies and other types of directives issued under 
DOE O 251.1. 
14. Program Secretarial Officers.  Heads of DOE Departmental Elements listed on the Office 
of Management website at 
https://www.directives.doe.gov/references/doe_departmental_elements. 
15. Recommendations.  Suggestions for senior line management’s consideration for 
improving program or management effectiveness.  Recommendations transcend the 
specifics associated with findings, deficiencies, or opportunities for improvement and are 
derived from the aggregate consideration of the results of the appraisal. 
16. Safety and Security Programs.  Includes (1) programs for the protection of the public, the 
environment, and worker health and safety and (2) programs for the protection of security 
assets to include special nuclear materials and classified and sensitive unclassified 
information in all forms.  Within the scope of this directive, safety and security programs 
include cybersecurity and emergency management programs.

--- page 15 ---
DOE O 227.1B Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only 
08-05-2026 Page 1-1 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (CRD) 
DOE O 227.1B, INDEPENDENT OVERSIGHT PROGRAM 
Regardless of the performer of the work, the contractor is responsible for complying with the 
requirements of this CRD.  The contractor is responsible for flowing down the requirements of 
this CRD to subcontractors at any tier to the extent necessary to ensure the contractor’s 
compliance with the requirements. 
The contractor must meet the following requirements: 
1. The contractor must support the conduct of Independent Oversight appraisal activities 
conducted by the Office of Enterprise Assessments (EA) at sites and facilities for which 
they are responsible.  This support includes, but is not limited to, providing the following: 
a. Timely identification of points of contact to provide information and support 
during appraisals; 
b. Documentation and information concerning safety and security programs3F
4 for 
which they are responsible; 
c. Access to contractor-managed facilities, networks, and personnel; and 
d. Work space and administrative support for appraisal teams. 
2. When notified by EA of an imminent danger or condition or major vulnerability that 
presents an unacceptable immediate risk to workers, the public, the environment, or 
national security, the responsible contractor organization must take the following actions 
in coordination with DOE line management: 
a. Promptly identify and implement immediate compensatory actions to mitigate 
the condition, 
b. Within 5 working days, notify the cognizant DOE line manager of actions taken 
and compensatory measures planned, and 
c. Develop and implement actions (including determining costs and identifying 
funds) to eliminate the vulnerability or reduce the level of risk to an acceptable 
level as soon as possible. 
 
4  Throughout this document, safety and security programs means (1) programs for the protection of the public, the 
environment, and worker health and safety and (2) programs for the protection of security assets to include 
special nuclear materials and classified and sensitive unclassified information in all forms.  This includes 
cybersecurity and emergency management programs.

--- page 16 ---
Attachment 1 - CRD, Contractors Only DOE O 227.1B 
Page 1-2 08-05-2026 
3. When requested, the contractor must review and provide comments on the factual 
accuracy of draft appraisal reports through the responsible DOE field element. 
4. Draft appraisal reports provided to contractors for review must only be shared with 
personnel within their organization, parent corporations, and subcontractors for the 
purpose of factual-accuracy evaluation and initial corrective-action development and 
implementation. 
5. The contractor must prepare, implement, and track to completion corrective actions to 
address findings identified in EA appraisal reports in accordance with established issues 
management systems (DOE O 226.1, current version) and quality assurance programs 
(DOE O 414.1, current version, and 10 CFR § 830, Nuclear Safety Management). 
6. The contractor must provide information on corrective actions to DOE when requested to 
support EA appraisal activities.
